

=== PAGE 1 ===


ECONOMICS
®
CFA Program Curriculum
2025 • LEVEL II • VOLUME 2


=== PAGE 2 ===


©2024 by CFA Institute. All rights reserved. This copyright covers material written
expressly for this volume by the editor/s as well as the compilation itself. It does
not cover the individual selections herein that first appeared elsewhere. Permission
to reprint these has been obtained by CFA Institute for this edition only. Further
reproductions by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval systems, must be arranged with
the individual copyright holders noted.
CFA®, Chartered Financial Analyst®, AIMR-PPS®, and GIPS® are just a few of the
trademarks owned by CFA Institute. To view a list of CFA Institute trademarks and the
Guide for Use of CFA Institute Marks, please visit our website at www. cfainstitute. org.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the
publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service.
If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent pro-
fessional should be sought.
All trademarks, service marks, registered trademarks, and registered service marks
are the property of their respective owners and are used herein for identification
purposes only.
ISBN 978-1-961409-22-4 (paper)
ISBN 978-1-961409-33-0 (ebook)
August 2024


=== PAGE 3 ===


CONTENTS
How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum v
CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem (LES) v
Designing Your Personal Study Program v
Errata vi
Other Feedback vi
Economics
Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value 3
Introduction 4
Foreign Exchange Market Concepts 4
Arbitrage Constraints on Spot Exchange Rate Quotes 8
Forward Markets 13
The Mark-to-Market Value of a Forward Contract 16
International Parity Conditions 21
International Parity Conditions 22
Covered and Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and Forward Rate Parity 22
Uncovered Interest Rate Parity 23
Forward Rate Parity 25
Purchasing Power Parity 29
The Fisher Effect, Real Interest Rate Parity, and International Parity
Conditions 32
International Parity Conditions: Tying All the Pieces Together 35
The Carry Trade 37
The Impact of Balance of Payments Flows 40
Current Account Imbalances and the Determination of Exchange Rates 41
Capital Flows 44
Equity Market Trends and Exchange Rates 45
Monetary and Fiscal Policies 48
The Mundell–Fleming Model 48
Monetary Models of Exchange Rate Determination 50
The Portfolio Balance Approach 53
Exchange Rate Management: Intervention and Controls 56
Warning Signs of a Currency Crisis 58
Summary 63
Appendix 66
References 68
Practice Problems 69
Solutions 77
Learning Module 2 Economic Growth 81
An Introduction to Growth in the Global Economy 82
Growth in the Global Economy: Developed vs. Developing Economies 82
Factors Favoring and Limiting Economic Growth 86


=== PAGE 4 ===


iv Contents
Financial Markets and Intermediaries 87
Political Stability, Rule of Law, and Property Rights 87
Education and Health Care Systems 88
Tax and Regulatory Systems 88
Free Trade and Unrestricted Capital Flows 89
Summary of Factors Limiting Growth in Developing Countries 89
Why Potential Growth Matters to Investors 92
Production Function and Growth Accounting 97
Production Function 98
Growth Accounting 99
Extending the Production Function 101
Capital Deepening vs. Technological Progress 101
Natural Resources 104
Labor Supply 106
Population Growth 106
Labor Force Participation 107
Net Migration 108
Average Hours Worked 110
Labor Quality: Human Capital 111
ICT, Non-ICT, and Technology and Public Infrastructure 111
Technology 114
Public Infrastructure 117
Summary of Economic Growth Determinants 118
Theories of Growth 123
Classical Model 124
Neoclassical Model 124
Implications of Neoclassical Model 131
Extension of Neoclassical Model 136
Endogenous Growth Model 137
Convergence Hypotheses 139
Growth in an Open Economy 143
Summary 152
References 155
Practice Problems 156
Solutions 163
Glossary G-1


=== PAGE 5 ===


v
How to Use the CFA
Program Curriculum
The CFA® Program exams measure your mastery of the core knowledge, skills, and
abilities required to succeed as an investment professional. These core competencies
are the basis for the Candidate Body of Knowledge (CBOK™). The CBOK consists of
four components:
A broad outline that lists the major CFA Program topic areas (www
.cfainstitute .org/ programs/ cfa/ curriculum/ cbok/ cbok)
Topic area weights that indicate the relative exam weightings of the top-level
topic areas (www .cfainstitute .org/ en/ programs/ cfa/ curriculum)
Learning outcome statements (LOS) that advise candidates about the
specific knowledge, skills, and abilities they should acquire from curricu-
lum content covering a topic area: LOS are provided at the beginning of
each block of related content and the specific lesson that covers them. We
encourage you to review the information about the LOS on our website
(www .cfainstitute .org/ programs/ cfa/ curriculum/ study -sessions), including
the descriptions of LOS “command words” on the candidate resources page
at www .cfainstitute .org/ -/ media/ documents/ support/ programs/ cfa -and
-cipm -los -command -words .ashx.
The CFA Program curriculum that candidates receive access to upon exam
registration
Therefore, the key to your success on the CFA exams is studying and understanding
the CBOK. You can learn more about the CBOK on our website: www .cfainstitute
.org/ programs/ cfa/ curriculum/ cbok.
The curriculum, including the practice questions, is the basis for all exam questions.
The curriculum is selected or developed specifically to provide candidates with the
knowledge, skills, and abilities reflected in the CBOK.
CFA INSTITUTE LEARNING ECOSYSTEM (LES)
Your exam registration fee includes access to the CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem
(LES). This digital learning platform provides access, even offline, to all the curriculum
content and practice questions. The LES is organized as a series of learning modules
consisting of short online lessons and associated practice questions. This tool is your
source for all study materials, including practice questions and mock exams. The LES
is the primary method by which CFA Institute delivers your curriculum experience.
Here, candidates will find additional practice questions to test their knowledge. Some
questions in the LES provide a unique interactive experience.
DESIGNING YOUR PERSONAL STUDY PROGRAM
An orderly, systematic approach to exam preparation is critical. You should dedicate
a consistent block of time every week to reading and studying. Review the LOS both
before and after you study curriculum content to ensure you can demonstrate the


=== PAGE 6 ===


vi How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum
knowledge, skills, and abilities described by the LOS and the assigned reading. Use
the LOS as a self-check to track your progress and highlight areas of weakness for
later review.
Successful candidates report an average of more than 300 hours preparing for each
exam. Your preparation time will vary based on your prior education and experience,
and you will likely spend more time on some topics than on others.
ERRATA
The curriculum development process is rigorous and involves multiple rounds of
reviews by content experts. Despite our efforts to produce a curriculum that is free of
errors, in some instances, we must make corrections. Curriculum errata are periodically
updated and posted by exam level and test date on the Curriculum Errata webpage
(www .cfainstitute .org/ en/ programs/ submit -errata). If you believe you have found an
error in the curriculum, you can submit your concerns through our curriculum errata
reporting process found at the bottom of the Curriculum Errata webpage.
OTHER FEEDBACK
Please send any comments or suggestions to info@c fainstitute. org, and we will review
your feedback thoughtfully.


=== PAGE 7 ===


Economics


=== PAGE 8 ===




=== PAGE 9 ===


L E A R N I N G M O D U L E
1
Currency Exchange Rates:
Understanding Equilibrium Value
by Michael R. Rosenberg, and William A. Barker, PhD, CFA.
Michael R. Rosenberg (USA). William A. Barker, PhD, CFA (Canada).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
calculate and interpret the bid–offer spread on a spot or forward
currency quotation and describe the factors that affect the bid–offer
spread
identify a triangular arbitrage opportunity and calculate its profit,
given the bid–offer quotations for three currencies
explain spot and forward rates and calculate the forward premium/
discount for a given currency
calculate the mark-to-market value of a forward contract
explain international parity conditions (covered and uncovered
interest rate parity, forward rate parity, purchasing power parity, and
the international Fisher effect)
describe relations among the international parity conditions
evaluate the use of the current spot rate, the forward rate,
purchasing power parity, and uncovered interest parity to forecast
future spot exchange rates
explain approaches to assessing the long-run fair value of an
exchange rate
describe the carry trade and its relation to uncovered interest rate
parity and calculate the profit from a carry trade
explain how flows in the balance of payment accounts affect
currency exchange rates
explain the potential effects of monetary and fiscal policy on
exchange rates
describe objectives of central bank or government intervention and
capital controls and describe the effectiveness of intervention and
capital controls
describe warning signs of a currency crisis


=== PAGE 10 ===


4 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
1 INTRODUCTION
Exchange rates are well known to follow a random walk, whereby fluctuations from
one day to the next are unpredictable. The business of currency forecasting can be
a humbling experience. Alan Greenspan, former chair of the US Federal Reserve
Board, famously noted that “having endeavored to forecast exchange rates for more
than half a century, I have understandably developed significant humility about my
ability in this area.”
Hence, our discussion is not about predicting exchange rates but about the tools
the reader can use to better understand long-run equilibrium value. This outlook
helps guide the market participant’s decisions with respect to risk exposures, as well
as whether currency hedges should be implemented and, if so, how they should be
managed. After discussing the basics of exchange rate transactions, we present the
main theories for currency determination—starting with the international parity
conditions—and then describe other important influences, such as current account
balances, capital flows, and monetary and fiscal policy.
Although these fundamentals-based models usually perform poorly in predicting
future exchange rates in the short run, they are crucial for understanding long-term
currency value. Thus, we proceed as follows:
■ We review the basic concepts of the foreign exchange market covered in
the CFA Program Level I curriculum and expand this previous coverage to
incorporate more material on bid–offer spreads.
■ We then begin to examine determinants of exchange rates, starting with
longer-term interrelationships among exchange rates, interest rates, and
inflation rates embodied in the international parity conditions. These parity
conditions form the key building blocks for many long-run exchange rate
models.
■ We also examine the foreign exchange (FX) carry trade, a trading strategy
that exploits deviations from uncovered interest rate parity and discuss the
relationship between a country’s exchange rate and its balance of payments.
■ We then examine how monetary and fiscal policies can indirectly affect
exchange rates by influencing the various factors described in our exchange
rate model.
■ The subsequent section focuses on direct public sector actions in foreign
exchange markets, both through capital controls and by foreign exchange
market intervention (buying and selling currencies for policy purposes).
■ The last section examines historical episodes of currency crisis and some
leading indicators that may signal the increased likelihood of a crisis.
2 FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET CONCEPTS
calculate and interpret the bid–offer spread on a spot or forward
currency quotation and describe the factors that affect the bid–offer
spread


=== PAGE 11 ===


Foreign Exchange Market Concepts 5
We begin with a brief review of some of the basic conventions of the FX market that
were covered in the CFA Program Level I curriculum. In this section, we cover (1) the
basics of exchange rate notation and pricing, (2) arbitrage pricing constraints on spot
rate foreign exchange quotes, and (3) forward rates and covered interest rate parity.
An exchange rate is the price of the base currency expressed in terms of the price
currency. For example, a USD/EUR rate of 1.1650 means the euro, the base currency,
costs 1.1650 US dollars (an appendix defines the three-letter currency codes). The
exact notation used to represent exchange rates can vary widely between sources,
and occasionally the same exchange rate notation will be used by different sources to
mean completely different things. The reader should be aware that the notation used
here may not be the same as that encountered elsewhere. To avoid confusion, we will
identify exchange rates using the convention of “P/B,” referring to the price of the
base currency, “B,” expressed in terms of the price currency, “P.”
NOTATION CONVENTIONS
Notation is generally not standardized in global foreign exchange markets, and
there are several common ways of expressing the same currency pair (e.g., JPY/
USD, USD:JPY, $/¥). What is common in FX markets, however, is the concept of
a “base” and a “price” currency when setting exchange rates. We will sometimes
switch to discussing a “domestic” and a “foreign” currency, quoted as foreign/
domestic (f/d). This is only an illustrative device for more easily explaining vari-
ous theoretical concepts. The candidate should be aware that currency pairs are
not described in terms of “foreign” and “domestic” currencies in professional
FX markets. This is because what is the “foreign” and what is the “domestic”
currency depend on where one is located, which can lead to confusion. For
instance, what is “foreign” and what is “domestic” for a Middle Eastern investor
trading CHF against GBP with the New York branch of a European bank, with
the trade ultimately booked at the bank’s headquarters in Paris?
The spot exchange rate is usually used for settlement on the second business day
after the trade date, referred to as T + 2 settlement (the exception being CAD/USD,
for which standard spot settlement is T + 1). In foreign exchange markets—as in other
financial markets—market participants are presented with a two-sided price in the
form of a bid price and an offer price (also called an ask price) quoted by potential
counterparties. The bid price is the price, defined in terms of the price currency, at
which the counterparty is willing to buy one unit of the base currency. Similarly, the
offer price is the price, in terms of the price currency, at which that counterparty is
willing to sell one unit of the base currency. For example, given a price request from
a client, a dealer might quote a two-sided price on the spot USD/EUR exchange rate
of 1.1648/1.1652. This means that the dealer is willing to pay USD 1.1648 to buy one
EUR and that the dealer is willing to sell one EUR for USD 1.1652.
There are two points to bear in mind about bid–offer quotes:
1. The offer price is always higher than the bid price. The bid–offer spread—the
difference between the offer price and the bid price—is the compensation
that counterparties seek for providing foreign exchange to other market
participants.
2. The party in the transaction who requests a two-sided price quote has the
option (but not the obligation) to deal at either the bid (to sell the base cur-
rency) or the offer (to buy the base currency) quoted by the dealer. If the party
chooses to trade at the quoted prices, the party is said to have either “hit the


=== PAGE 12 ===


6 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
bid” or “paid the offer.” If the base currency is being sold, the party is said
to have hit the bid. If the base currency is being bought, the party is said to
have paid the offer.
We will distinguish here between the bid–offer pricing a client receives from a
dealer and the pricing a dealer receives from the interbank market. Dealers buy and
sell foreign exchange among themselves in what is called the interbank market. This
global network for exchanging currencies among professional market participants
allows dealers to adjust their inventories and risk positions, distribute foreign curren-
cies to end users who need them, and transfer foreign exchange rate risk to market
participants who are willing to bear it. The interbank market is typically for dealing
sizes of at least 1 million units of the base currency. Of course, the dealing amount can
be larger than 1 million units; indeed, interbank market trades generally are measured
in terms of multiples of a million units of the base currency. Please note that many
non-bank entities can now access the interbank market. They include institutional
asset managers and hedge funds.
The bid–offer spread a dealer provides to most clients typically is slightly wider
than the bid–offer spread observed in the interbank market. Most currencies, except
for the yen, are quoted to four decimal places. The fourth decimal place (0.0001) is
referred to as a “pip.” The yen is typically quoted to just two decimal places; in yen
quotes, the second decimal place (0.01) is referred to as a pip.
For example, if the quote in the interbank USD/EUR spot market is 1.1649/1.1651
(two pips wide), the dealer might quote a client a bid–offer of 1.1648/1.1652 (four pips
wide) for a spot USD/EUR transaction. When the dealer buys (sells) the base currency
from (to) a client, the dealer is typically expecting to quickly turn around and sell (buy)
the base currency in the interbank market. This offsetting transaction allows the dealer
to divest the risk exposure assumed by providing a two-sided price to the client and
to hopefully make a profit. Continuing our example, suppose the dealer’s client hits
the dealer’s bid and sells EUR to the dealer for USD 1.1648. The dealer is now long
EUR (and short USD) and wants to cover this position in the interbank market. To
do this, the dealer sells the EUR in the interbank market by hitting the interbank bid.
As a result, the dealer bought EUR from the client at USD 1.1648 and then sold the
EUR in the interbank for USD 1.1649. This gives the dealer a profit of USD 0.0001
(one pip) for every EUR transacted. This one pip translates into a profit of USD 100
per EUR million bought from the client. If, instead of hitting his bid, the client paid
the offer (1.1652), then the dealer could pay the offer in the interbank market (1.1651),
earning a profit of one pip.
The size of the bid–offer spread quoted to dealers’ clients in the FX market can
vary widely across exchange rates and is not constant over time, even for a single
exchange rate. The size of this spread depends primarily on three factors:
■ the bid–offer spread in the interbank foreign exchange market for the two
currencies involved,
■ the size of the transaction, and
■ the relationship between the dealer and the client.
We examine each factor in turn.
The size of the bid–offer spread quoted in the interbank market depends on the
liquidity in this market. Liquidity is influenced by several factors:
1. The currency pair involved. Market participation is greater for some cur-
rency pairs than for others. Liquidity in the major currency pairs—for
example, USD/EUR, JPY/USD, and USD/GBP—can be quite high. These
markets are almost always deep, with multiple bids and offers from market
participants around the world. In other currency pairs, particularly some of


=== PAGE 13 ===


Foreign Exchange Market Concepts 7
the more obscure currency cross rates (e.g., MXN/CHF), market participa-
tion is much thinner and consequently the bid–offer spread in the interbank
market will be wider.
2. The time of day. The interbank FX markets are most liquid when the major
FX trading centers are open. Business hours in London and New York—the
two largest FX trading centers—overlap from approximately 8:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m. New York time. The interbank FX market for most currency pairs
is typically most liquid during these hours. After London closes, liquid-
ity is thinner through the New York afternoon. The Asian session starts
when dealers in Tokyo, Singapore, and Hong Kong SAR open for business,
typically by 7:00 p.m. New York time. For most currency pairs, however,
the Asian session is not as liquid as the London and New York sessions.
Although FX markets are open 24 hours a day on business days, between
the time New York closes and the time Asia opens, liquidity in interbank
markets can be very thin because Sydney, Australia, tends to be the only
active trading center during these hours. For reference, the chart below
shows a 24-hour period from midnight (00:00) to midnight (24:00) London
time, corresponding standard times in Tokyo and New York, and, shaded
in grey, the approximate hours of the most liquid trading periods in each
market.
Standard Time and Approximate FX Trading Hours in Major Markets: Midnight to
Midnight (London Time)
Tokyo 09:00 13:00 17:00 21:00 01:00 05:00 09:00
Day+1 Day+1 Day+1
London 00:00 04:00 08:00 12:00 16:00 20:00 24:00
New York 19:00 23:00 03:00 07:00 11:00 15:00 19:00
Day−1 Day−1
3. Market volatility. As in any financial market, when major market partici-
pants have greater uncertainty about the factors influencing market pricing,
they will attempt to reduce their risk exposures and/or charge a higher price
for taking on risk. In the FX market, this response implies wider bid–offer
spreads in both the interbank and broader markets. Geopolitical events (e.g.,
war, civil strife), market crashes, and major data releases (e.g., US non-farm
payrolls) are among the factors that influence spreads and liquidity.
The size of the transaction can also affect the bid–offer spread shown by a dealer
to clients. Typically, the larger the transaction, the further away from the current
spot exchange rate the dealing price will be. Hence, a client who asks a dealer for a
two-sided spot CAD/USD price on, for example, USD 50 million will be shown a wider
bid–offer spread than a client who asks for a price on USD 1 million. The wider spread
reflects the greater difficulty the dealer faces in offsetting the foreign exchange risk
of the position in the interbank FX market. Smaller dealing sizes can also affect the
bid–offer quote shown to clients. “Retail” quotes are typically for dealing sizes smaller
than 1 million units of the base currency and can range all the way down to foreign
exchange transactions conducted by individuals. The bid–offer spreads for these retail
transactions can be very large compared with those in the interbank market.
The relationship between the dealer and the client can also affect the size of the
bid–offer spread shown by the dealer. For many clients, the spot foreign exchange
business is only one business service among many that a dealer provides to that client.
For example, the dealer firm might also transact in bond and/or equity securities with
the same client. In a competitive business environment, in order to win the client’s
business for these other services, the dealer might provide a tighter (i.e., smaller)


=== PAGE 14 ===


8 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
bid–offer spot exchange rate quote. The dealer might also give tighter bid–offer quotes
in order to win repeat FX business. A client’s credit risk can also be a factor. A client
with a poor credit profile may be quoted a wider bid–offer spread than one with
good credit. Given the short settlement cycle for spot FX transactions (typically two
business days), however, credit risk is not the most important factor in determining
the client’s bid–offer spread on spot exchange rates.
3 ARBITRAGE CONSTRAINTS ON SPOT EXCHANGE RATE
QUOTES
identify a triangular arbitrage opportunity and calculate its profit,
given the bid–offer quotations for three currencies
The bid–offer quotes a dealer shows in the interbank FX market must respect two
arbitrage constraints; otherwise the dealer creates riskless arbitrage opportunities for
other interbank market participants. We will confine our attention to the interbank FX
market because arbitrage presumes the ability to deal simultaneously with different
market participants and in different markets, the ability to access “wholesale” bid–offer
quotes, and the market sophistication to spot arbitrage opportunities.
First, the bid shown by a dealer in the interbank market cannot be higher than
the current interbank offer, and the offer shown by a dealer cannot be lower than the
current interbank bid. If the bid–offer quotes shown by a dealer are inconsistent with
the then-current interbank market quotes, other market participants will buy from the
cheaper source and sell to the more expensive source. This arbitrage will eventually
bring the two prices back into line. For example, suppose that the current spot USD/
EUR price in the interbank market is 1.1649/1.1651. If a dealer showed a misaligned
price quote of 1.1652/1.1654, then other market participants would pay the offer in
the interbank market, buying EUR at a price of USD 1.1651, and then sell the EUR to
the dealer by hitting the dealer’s bid at USD 1.1652—thereby making a riskless profit
of one pip on the trade. This arbitrage would continue as long as the dealer’s bid–offer
quote violated the arbitrage constraint.
Second, the cross-rate bids (offers) posted by a dealer must be lower (higher) than
the implied cross-rate offers (bids) available in the interbank market. A currency dealer
located in a given country typically provides exchange rate quotations between that
country’s currency and various foreign currencies. If a particular currency pair is
not explicitly quoted, it can be inferred from the quotes for each currency in terms
of the exchange rate with a third nation’s currency. For example, given exchange rate
quotes for the currency pairs A/B and C/B, we can back out the implied cross rate
of A/C. This implied A/C cross rate must be consistent with the A/B and C/B rates.
This again reflects the basic principle of arbitrage: If identical financial products are
priced differently, then market participants will buy the cheaper one and sell the more
expensive one until the price difference is eliminated. In the context of FX cross rates,
there are two ways to trade currency A against currency C: (1) using the cross rate
A/C or (2) using the A/B and C/B rates. Because, in the end, both methods involve
selling (buying) currency C in order to buy (sell) currency A, the exchange rates for
these two approaches must be consistent. If the exchange rates are not consistent,
the arbitrageur will buy currency C from a dealer if it is undervalued (relative to the
cross rate) and sell currency A. If currency C is overvalued by a dealer (relative to the
cross rate), it will be sold and currency A will be bought.


=== PAGE 15 ===


Arbitrage Constraints on Spot Exchange Rate Quotes 9
To illustrate this triangular arbitrage among three currencies, suppose that the
interbank market bid–offer in USD/EUR is 1.1649/1.1651 and that the bid–offer in
JPY/USD is 105.39/105.41. We need to use these two interbank bid–offer quotes to
calculate the market-implied bid–offer quote on the JPY/EUR cross rate.
Begin by considering the transactions required to sell JPY and buy EUR, going
through the JPY/USD and USD/EUR currency pairs. We can view this process intu-
itively as follows:
Sell JPY Sell JPY Sell USD
= then
Buy EUR Buy USD Buy EUR
Note that “Buy USD” and “Sell USD” in the expressions on the right-hand side of the
equal sign will cancel out to give the JPY/EUR cross rate. In equation form, we can
represent this relationship as follows:
_JPY _JPY _ USD
= .
(EUR) ( USD )(EUR)
Now, let’s incorporate the bid–offer rates in order to do the JPY/EUR calculation. A
rule of thumb is that when we speak of a bid or offer exchange rate, we are referring
to the bid or offer for the currency in the denominator (the base currency).
i. The left-hand side of the above equal sign is “Sell JPY, Buy EUR.” In the
JPY/EUR price quote, the EUR is in the denominator (it is the base cur-
rency). Because we want to buy the currency in the denominator, we need
an exchange rate that is an offer rate. Thus, we will be calculating the offer
rate for JPY/EUR.
ii. The first term on the right-hand side of the equal sign is “Sell JPY, Buy
USD.” Because we want to buy the currency in the denominator of the
quote, we need an exchange rate that is an offer rate. Thus, we need the
offer rate for JPY/USD.
iii. The second term on the right-hand side of the equal sign is “Sell USD, Buy
EUR.” Because we want to buy the currency in the denominator of the
quote, we need an exchange rate that is an offer rate. Thus, we need the
offer rate for USD/EUR.
Combining all of this conceptually and putting in the relevant offer rates leads to
a JPY/EUR offer rate of
_JPY _JPY _ USD
= = 105.41 × 1.1651 = 122.81.
(EUR) offer ( USD ) offer (EUR) offer
Perhaps not surprisingly, calculating the implied JPY/EUR bid rate uses the same
process as above but with “Buy JPY, Sell EUR” for the left-hand side of the equation,
which leads to
_JPY _JPY _ USD
= = 105.39 × 1.1649 = 122.77.
(EUR) ( USD ) (EUR)
bid bid bid
As one would expect, the implied cross-rate bid (122.77) is less than the offer (122.81).
This simple formula seems relatively straightforward: To get the implied bid cross
rate, simply multiply the bid rates for the other two currencies. However, depending
on the quotes provided, it may be necessary to invert one of the quotes in order to
complete the calculation.
This is best illustrated with an example. Consider the case of calculating the implied
GBP/EUR cross rate if you are given USD/GBP and USD/EUR quotes. Simply using
the provided quotes will not generate the desired GBP/EUR cross rate:
_GBP _USD _USD
≠ .
EUR (GBP)(EUR)


=== PAGE 16 ===


10 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Instead, because the USD is in the numerator in both currency pairs, we will have to
invert one of the pairs to derive the GBP/EUR cross rate.
The following equation represents the cross-rate relationship we are trying to derive:
_GBP _GBP _USD
= .
EUR (USD)(EUR)
But we don’t have the GBP/USD quote. We can, however, invert the USD/GBP quote
and use that in our calculation. Let’s assume the bid–offer quote provided is for USD/
GBP and is 1.2302/1.2304. With this quote, if we want to buy GBP (the currency in
the denominator), we will buy GBP at the offer and the relevant quote is 1.2304. We
can invert this quote to arrive at the needed GBP/USD quote: 1 ÷ 1.2304 = 0.81274.
Note that, in this example, when we buy the GBP, we are also selling the USD. When
we invert the provided USD/GBP offer quote, we obtain 0.81274 GBP/USD. This is
the price at which we sell the USD—that is, the GBP/USD bid. It may help here to
remember our rule of thumb from above: When we speak of a bid or offer exchange
rate, we are referring to the bid or offer for the currency in the denominator (the
base currency).
Similarly, to get a GBP/USD offer, we use the inverse of the USD/GBP bid of 1.2302:
1 ÷ 1.2302 = 0.81288. (Note that we extended the calculated GBP/USD 0.81274/0.81288
quotes to five decimal places to avoid truncation errors in subsequent calculations.)
We can now finish the calculation of the bid and offer cross rates for GBP/EUR.
Using the previously provided 1.1649/1.1651 as the bid–offer in USD/EUR, we cal-
culate the GBP/EUR bid rate as follows:
_GBP _GBP _ USD
= = 0.81274 × 1.1649 = 0.9468.
(EUR) ( USD ) (EUR)
bid bid bid
Similarly, the implied GBP/EUR offer rate is
_GBP _GBP _ USD
= = 0.81288 × 1.1651 = 0.9471.
(EUR) offer ( USD ) offer (EUR) offer
Note that the implied bid rate is less than the implied offer rate, as it must be to
prevent arbitrage.
We conclude this section on arbitrage constraints with some simple observations:
■ The arbitrage constraint on implied cross rates is similar to that for spot
rates (posted bid rates cannot be higher than the market’s offer; posted offer
rates cannot be lower than the market’s bid). The only difference is that
this second arbitrage constraint is applied across currency pairs instead of
involving a single currency pair.
■ In reality, any violations of these arbitrage constraints will quickly disap-
pear. Both human traders and automatic trading algorithms are constantly
on alert for any pricing inefficiencies and will arbitrage them away almost
instantly. If Dealer 1 is buying a currency at a price higher than the price
at which Dealer 2 is selling it, the arbitrageur will buy the currency from
Dealer 2 and resell it to Dealer 1. As a result of buying and selling pressures,
Dealer 2 will raise his offer prices and Dealer 1 will reduce her bid prices to
the point where arbitrage profits are no longer available.
■ Market participants do not need to calculate cross rates manually because
electronic dealing machines (which are essentially just specialized comput-
ers) will automatically calculate cross bid–offer rates given any two underly-
ing bid–offer rates.


=== PAGE 17 ===


Arbitrage Constraints on Spot Exchange Rate Quotes 11
EXAMPLE 1
Bid–Offer Rates
The following are spot rate quotes in the interbank market:
USD/EUR 1.1649/1.1651
JPY/USD 105.39/105.41
CAD/USD 1.3199/1.3201
SEK/USD 9.6300/9.6302
1. What is the bid–offer on the SEK/EUR cross rate implied by the interbank
market?
A. 0.1209/0.1211
B. 8.2656/8.2668
C. 11.2180/11.2201
Solution
C is correct. Using the provided quotes and setting up the equations so that
the cancellation of terms results in the SEK/EUR quote,
_SEK _SEK _USD
= × .
EUR USD EUR
Hence, to calculate the SEK/EUR bid (offer) rate, we multiply the SEK/USD
and USD/EUR bid (offer) rates to get the following:
Bid: 11.2180 = 9.6300 × 1.1649.
Offer: 11.2201 = 9.6302 × 1.1651.
2. What is the bid–offer on the JPY/CAD cross rate implied by the interbank
market?
A. 78.13/78.17
B. 79.85/79.85
C. 79.84/79.86
Solution
C is correct. Using the intuitive equation-based approach,
−1
_JPY _JPY _CAD _JPY _ USD
= × = × .
CAD USD (USD) USD CAD
This equation shows that we have to invert the CAD/USD quotes to get
the USD/CAD bid–offer rates of 0.75752/0.75763. That is, given the CAD/
USD quotes of 1.3199/1.3201, we take the inverse of each and interchange
bid and offer, so that the USD/CAD quotes are (1/1.3201)/(1/1.3199), or
0.75752/0.75763. Multiplying the JPY/USD and USD/CAD bid–offer rates
then leads to the following:
Bid: 79.84 = 105.39 × 0.75752.
Offer: 79.86 = 105.41 × 0.75763.


=== PAGE 18 ===


12 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
3. If a dealer quoted a bid–offer rate of 79.81/79.83 in JPY/CAD, then a trian-
gular arbitrage would involve buying:
A. CAD in the interbank market and selling it to the dealer, for a profit of
JPY 0.01 per CAD.
B. JPY from the dealer and selling it in the interbank market, for a profit
of CAD 0.01 per JPY.
C. CAD from the dealer and selling it in the interbank market, for a profit
of JPY 0.01 per CAD.
Solution
C is correct. The implied interbank cross rate for JPY/CAD is 79.84/79.86
(the answer to Question 2). Hence, the dealer is offering to sell the CAD
(the base currency in the quote) too cheaply, at an offer rate that is below
the interbank bid rate (79.83 versus 79.84, respectively). Triangular arbitrage
would involve buying CAD from the dealer (paying the dealer’s offer) and
selling CAD in the interbank market (hitting the interbank bid), for a profit
of JPY 0.01 (79.84 − 79.83) per CAD transacted.
4. If a dealer quoted a bid–offer of 79.82/79.87 in JPY/CAD, then you could:
A. not make any arbitrage profits.
B. make arbitrage profits buying JPY from the dealer and selling it in the
interbank market.
C. make arbitrage profits buying CAD from the dealer and selling it in
the interbank market.
Solution
A is correct. The arbitrage relationship is not violated: The dealer’s bid
(offer) is not above (below) the interbank market’s offer (bid). The implied
interbank cross rate for JPY/CAD is 79.84/79.86 (the solution to Question
2).
5. A market participant is considering the following transactions:
Transaction 1 Buy CAD 100 million against the USD at 15:30 London time.
Transaction 2 Sell CAD 100 million against the KRW at 21:30 London time.
Transaction 3 Sell CAD 10 million against the USD at 15:30 London time.
Given the proposed transactions, what is the most likely ranking of the bid–
offer spreads, from tightest to widest, under normal market conditions?
A. Transactions 1, 2, 3
B. Transactions 2, 1, 3
C. Transactions 3, 1, 2
Solution
C is correct. The CAD/USD currency pair is most liquid when New York
and London are both in their most liquid trading periods at the same time
(approximately 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. New York time, or about 13:00 to
16:00 London time). Transaction 3 is for a smaller amount than Transaction
1. Transaction 2 is for a less liquid currency pair (KRW/CAD is traded less
than CAD/USD) and occurs outside of normal dealing hours in all three
major centers (London, North America, and Asia); the transaction is also for
a large amount.


=== PAGE 19 ===


Forward Markets 13
FORWARD MARKETS 4
explain spot and forward rates and calculate the forward premium/
discount for a given currency
Outright forward contracts (often referred to simply as forwards) are agreements to
exchange one currency for another on a future date at an exchange rate agreed upon
today. Any exchange rate transaction that has a settlement date longer than T + 2 is
a forward contract.
Forward exchange rates must satisfy an arbitrage relationship that equates the
investment return on two alternative but equivalent investments. To simplify the expla-
nation of this arbitrage relationship and to focus on the intuition behind forward rate
calculations, we will ignore the bid–offer spread on exchange rates and money market
instruments. In addition, we will alter our exchange rate notation from price/base
currency (P/B) to “foreign/domestic currency” (f/d), making the assumption that the
domestic currency for an investor is the base currency in the exchange rate quotation.
Using this (f/d) notation will make it easier to illustrate the choice an investor faces
between domestic and foreign investments, as well as the arbitrage relationships that
equate the returns on these investments when their risk characteristics are equivalent.
Consider an investor with one unit of domestic currency to invest for one year.
The investor faces two alternatives:
A. One alternative is to invest cash for one year at the domestic risk-free rate
(i ). At the end of the year, the investment would be worth (1 + i ).
d d
B. The other alternative is to convert the domestic currency to foreign cur-
rency at the spot rate of S and invest for one year at the foreign risk-free
f/d
rate (i). At the end of the period, the investor would have S (1 + i) units of
f f/d f
foreign currency. These funds then must be converted back to the investor’s
domestic currency. If the exchange rate to be used for this end-of-year con-
version is set at the start of the period using a one-year forward contract,
then the investor will have eliminated the foreign exchange risk associated
with converting at an unknown future spot rate. If we let F denote the for-
f/d
ward rate, the investor would obtain (1/F ) units of the domestic currency
f/d
for each unit of foreign currency sold forward. Hence, in domestic currency,
at the end of the year, the investment would be worth S (1 + i)(1/F ).
f/d f f/d
The two investment alternatives above (A and B) are risk free and therefore must
offer the same return. If they did not offer the same return, investors could earn a
riskless arbitrage profit by borrowing in one currency, lending in the other, and using
the spot and forward exchange markets to eliminate currency risk. Equating the
returns on these two investment alternatives—that is, putting investments A and B
on opposite sides of the equal sign—leads to the following relationship:
_1
(1 + i ) = S 1 + i .
d f/d( f)( F f /d )
To see the intuition behind forward rate calculations, note that the right-hand
side of the expression (for investment B) also shows the chronological order of this
investment: Convert from domestic to foreign currency at the spot rate (S ); invest
f/d
this foreign currency amount at the foreign risk-free interest rate (1 + i); and then at
f
maturity, convert the foreign currency investment proceeds back into the domestic
currency using the forward rate (1/F ).
f/d


=== PAGE 20 ===


14 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
For simplicity, we assumed a one-year horizon in the preceding example. However,
the argument holds for any investment horizon. The risk-free assets used in this arbi-
trage relationship are typically bank deposits quoted using the appropriate Market
Reference Rate for each currency involved. The day count convention MRR deposits
may be Actual/360 or Actual/365. The notation Actual/360 means that interest is cal-
culated as if there were 360 days in a year. The notation Actual/365 means interest is
calculated as if there were 365 days in a year. The main exception to the Actual/360 day
count convention is the GBP, for which the convention is Actual/365. For the purposes
of our discussion, we will use Actual/360 consistently in order to avoid complication.
Incorporating this day count convention into our arbitrage formula leads to
_Actual _Actual _1
1 + i = S 1 + i .
( d[ 360 ]) f/d( f[ 360 ])( F f /d )
This equation can be rearranged to isolate the forward rate:
_Actual
1 + i
_f[ 360 ]
F = S . (1)
f/d f/d _Actual
(1 + i )
d[ 360 ]
Equation 1 describes covered interest rate parity. Our previous work shows that
covered interest rate parity is based on an arbitrage relationship among risk-free inter-
est rates and spot and forward exchange rates. Because of this arbitrage relationship
between investment alternatives, Equation 1 can also be described as saying that the
covered (i.e., currency-hedged) interest rate differential between the two markets is
zero.
The covered interest rate parity equation can also be rearranged to give an expres-
sion for the forward premium or discount:
_Actual
_[ 360 ]
F − S = S i − i .
f/d f/d f/d _Actual (f d)
(1 + i )
d[ 360 ]
The domestic currency will trade at a forward premium (F > S ) if, and only if,
f/d f/d
the foreign risk-free interest rate exceeds the domestic risk-free interest rate (i > i ).
f d
Equivalently, in this case, the foreign currency will trade at a lower rate in the forward
contract (relative to the spot rate), and we would say that the foreign currency trades
at a forward discount. In other words, if it is possible to earn more interest in the
foreign market than in the domestic market, then the forward discount for the foreign
currency will offset the higher foreign interest rate. Otherwise, covered interest rate
parity would not hold and arbitrage opportunities would exist.
When the foreign currency is at a higher rate in the forward contract, relative to
the spot rate, we say that the foreign currency trades at a forward premium. In the
case of a forward premium for the foreign currency, the foreign risk-free interest rate
will be less than the domestic risk-free interest rate. Additionally, as can be seen in
the equation above, the premium or discount is proportional to the spot exchange
rate (S ), proportional to the interest rate differential (i − i ) between the markets,
f/d f d
and approximately proportional to the time to maturity (Actual/360).
Although we have illustrated the covered interest rate parity equation (Equation
1) in terms of foreign and domestic currencies (using the notation f/d), this equation
can also be expressed in our more standard exchange rate quoting convention of price
and base currencies (P/B):
_Actual
1 + i
_P[ 360 ]
F = S .
P/B P/B _Actual
(1 + i )
B[ 360 ]


=== PAGE 21 ===


Forward Markets 15
When dealing in professional FX markets, it may be more useful to think of the
covered interest rate parity equation and the calculation of forward rates in this P/B
notation rather than in foreign/domestic (f/d) notation. Domestic and foreign are
relative concepts that depend on where one is located, and because of the potential for
confusion, these terms are not used for currency quotes in professional FX markets.
EXAMPLE 2
Calculating the Forward Premium (Discount)
The following table shows the mid-market rate (i.e., the average of the bid and
offer) for the current CAD/AUD spot exchange rate as well as for AUD and
CAD 270-day MRR (annualized):
Spot (CAD/AUD) 0.9000
270-day MRR (AUD) 1.47%
270-day MRR (CAD) 0.41%
1. The forward premium (discount) for a 270-day forward contract for CAD/
AUD would be closest to:
A. −0.0094.
B. −0.0071.
C. +0.0071.
Solution
B is correct. The equation to calculate the forward premium (discount) is as
follows:
_Actual
_[ 360 ]
F − S = S ( i − i ) .
P/B P/B P/B _Actual P B
(1 + i )
B[ 360 ]
Because AUD is the base currency in the CAD/AUD quote, putting in the
information from the table gives us
_270
_____[3_6_0_]____
F − S = 0.9000 (0.0041 − 0.0147) = − 0.0071.
P/B P/B _270
(1 + 0.0147 )
[360]
In professional FX markets, forward exchange rates are typically quoted in terms of
points—the difference between the forward exchange rate quote and the spot exchange
rate quote, scaled so that the points can be directly related to the last decimal place
in the spot quote. Thus, the forward rate quote is typically shown as the bid–offer on
the spot rate and the number of forward points at each maturity, as shown in Exhibit
1 (“Maturity” is defined in terms of the time between spot settlement—usually T +
2—and the settlement of the forward contract).


=== PAGE 22 ===


16 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Exhibit 1: Sample Spot and Forward Quotes (Bid–Offer)
Maturity Spot Rate
Spot (USD/EUR) 1.1649/1.1651
Forward Points
1 month −5.6/−5.1
3 months −15.9/−15.3
6 months −37.0/−36.3
12 months −94.3/−91.8
Note the following:
■ As always, the offer in the bid–offer quote is larger than the bid. In this
example, the forward points are negative (i.e., the forward rate for the EUR
is at a discount to the spot rate) but the bid is a smaller number (−5.6 versus
−5.1 at the one-month maturity).
■ The absolute number of forward points is a function of the term of the for-
ward contract: A longer contract term results in a larger number of points.
■ Because this is an OTC market, a client is not restricted to dealing only at
the dates/maturities shown. Dealers typically quote standard forward dates,
but forward deals can be arranged for any forward date the client requires.
The forward points for these non-standard (referred to as “broken”) forward
dates will typically be interpolated on the basis of the points shown for the
standard settlement dates.
■ The quoted points are already scaled to each maturity—they are not
annualized—so there is no need to adjust them.
To convert any of these quoted forward points into a forward rate, divide the num-
ber of points by 10,000 (to scale it down to the same four decimal places in the USD/
EUR spot quote) and then add the result to the spot exchange rate quote (because the
JPY/USD exchange rate is quoted to only two decimal places, forward points for the
dollar–yen currency pair are divided by 100). Be careful, however, about which side of
the market (bid or offer) is being quoted. For example, suppose a market participant
is selling the EUR forward against the USD and is given a USD/EUR quote. The EUR
is the base currency; thus, the market participant must use the bid rates (i.e., hit the
bid). Using the data in Exhibit 1, the three-month forward bid rate in this case would
be based on the spot bid and the forward points bid and hence would be
1.1649 + (−15.9/10,000) = 1.16331.
The market participant would be selling EUR three months forward at a price of
USD 1.16331 per EUR.
5 THE MARK-TO-MARKET VALUE OF A FORWARD
CONTRACT
calculate the mark-to-market value of a forward contract


=== PAGE 23 ===


The Mark-to-Market Value of a Forward Contract 17
Next, we consider the mark-to-market value of forward contracts. As with other
financial instruments, the mark-to-market value of forward contracts reflects the
profit (or loss) that would be realized from closing out the position at current market
prices. To close out a forward position, we must offset it with an equal and opposite
forward position using the spot exchange rate and forward points available in the
market when the offsetting position is created. When a forward contract is initiated,
the mark-to-market value of the contract is zero, and no cash changes hands. From
that moment onward, however, the mark-to-market value of the forward contract
will change as the spot exchange rate changes and as interest rates change in either
of the two currencies.
Let’s look at an example. Suppose that a market participant bought GBP 10 million
for delivery against the AUD in six months at an “all-in” forward rate of 1.8100 AUD/
GBP. (The all-in forward rate is simply the sum of the spot rate and the scaled forward
points.) Three months later, the market participant wants to close out this forward
contract. This would require selling GBP 10 million three months forward using
the AUD/GBP spot exchange rate and forward points in effect at that time. Before
looking at this exchange rate, note that the offsetting forward contract is defined in
terms of the original position taken. The original position in this example was “long
GBP 10 million,” so the offsetting contract is “short GBP 10 million.” However, there is
ambiguity here: To be long GBP 10 million at 1.8100 AUD/GBP is equivalent to being
short AUD 18,100,000 (10,000,000 × 1.8100) at the same forward rate. To avoid this
ambiguity, for the purposes of this discussion, we will state what the relevant forward
position is for mark-to-market purposes. The net gain or loss from the transaction
will be reflected in the alternate currency.
Assume the bid–offer quotes for spot and forward points three months prior to
the settlement date are as follows:
Spot rate (AUD/GBP) 1.8210/1.8215
Three-month points 130/140
To sell GBP (the base currency in the AUD/GBP quote), we will be calculating the bid
side of the market. Hence, the appropriate all-in three-month forward rate to use is
1.8210 + 130/10,000 = 1.8340.
This means that the market participant originally bought GBP 10 million at an AUD/
GBP rate of 1.8100 and subsequently sold that amount at a rate of 1.8340. These GBP
amounts will net to zero at the settlement date (GBP 10 million both bought and sold),
but the AUD amounts will not, because the forward rate has changed. The AUD cash
flow at the settlement date will be
(1.8340 − 1.8100) × 10,000,000 = +AUD 240,000.
This is a cash inflow because the market participant was long the GBP with the original
forward position and the GBP subsequently appreciated (the AUD/GBP rate increased).
This cash flow will be paid at the settlement day, which is still three months away.
To calculate the mark-to-market value of the dealer’s position, we must discount this
cash flow to the present. The present value of this amount is found by discounting the
settlement day cash flow by the three-month discount rate. Because this amount is in
AUD, we use the three-month AUD discount rate. Suppose that three-month AUD
MRR is 2.40% (annualized). The present value of this future AUD cash flow is then
_A__U_D_ _2_4_0_,0_0_0_
= AUD 238,569.
_90
1 + 0.024
(360)
This result is the mark-to-market value of the original long GBP 10 million
six-month forward when it is closed out three months prior to settlement.


=== PAGE 24 ===


18 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
To summarize, the process for marking to market a forward position is relatively
straightforward:
1. Create an offsetting forward position that is equal to the original forward
position. (In the example above, the market participant was long GBP 10
million forward, so the offsetting forward contract would be to sell GBP 10
million.)
2. Determine the appropriate all-in forward rate for this new, offsetting for-
ward position. If the base currency of the exchange rate quote is being sold
(bought), then use the bid (offer) side of the market.
3. Calculate the cash flow at the settlement day. This amount will be based on
the original contract size times the difference between the original forward
rate and that calculated in Step 2. If the currency the market participant was
originally long (short) subsequently appreciated (depreciated), then there
will be a cash inflow (outflow). (In the above example, the market participant
was long the GBP, which subsequently appreciated, leading to a cash inflow
at the settlement day.)
4. Calculate the present value of this cash flow at the future settlement date.
The currency of the cash flow and the discount rate must match. (In the
example above, the cash flow at the settlement date was in AUD, so an AUD
MRR was used to calculate the present value.)
The factors that affect the bid–offer spread for forward points are the same as
those we discussed for spot bid–offer rates: the interbank market liquidity of the
underlying currency pair, the size of the transaction, and the relationship between
the client and the dealer. For forward bid–offer spreads, we can also add a fourth
factor: the term of the forward contract. Generally, the longer the term of the forward
contract, the wider the bid–offer spread. This relationship holds because as the term
of the contract increases,
■ liquidity in the forward market tends to decline,
■ the exposure to counterparty credit risk increases, and
■ the interest rate risk of the contract increases (forward rates are based on
interest rate differentials, and a longer duration means greater price sensitiv-
ity to movements in interest rates).
EXAMPLE 3
Forward Rates and the Mark-to-Market Value of Forward
Positions
A dealer is contemplating trade opportunities in the CHF/GBP currency pair.
The following are the current spot rates and forward points being quoted for
the CHF/GBP currency pair:
Spot rate (CHF/GBP) 1.2939/1.2941
One month −8.3/−7.9
Two months −17.4/−16.8
Three months −25.4/−24.6
Four months −35.4/−34.2
Five months −45.9/−44.1
Six months −56.5/−54.0


=== PAGE 25 ===


The Mark-to-Market Value of a Forward Contract 19
1. The current all-in bid rate for delivery of GBP against the CHF in three
months is closest to:
A. 1.29136.
B. 1.29150.
C. 1.29164.
Solution
A is correct. The current all-in three-month bid rate for GBP (the base cur-
rency) is equal to 1.2939 + (−25.4/10,000) = 1.29136.
2. The all-in rate that the dealer will be quoted today by another dealer to sell
the CHF six months forward against the GBP is closest to:
A. 1.28825.
B. 1.28835.
C. 1.28870.
Solution
C is correct. The dealer will sell CHF against the GBP, which is equivalent
to buying GBP (the base currency) against the CHF. Hence, the offer side of
the market will be used for forward points. The all-in forward price will be
1.2941 + (−54.0/10,000) = 1.28870.
3. Some time ago, Laurier Bay Capital, an investment fund based in Los An-
geles, hedged a long exposure to the New Zealand dollar by selling NZD 10
million forward against the USD; the all-in forward price was 0.7900 (USD/
NZD). Three months prior to the settlement date, Laurier Bay wants to
mark this forward position to market. The bid–offer for the USD/NZD spot
rate, the three-month forward points, and the three-month MRRs (annual-
ized) are as follows:
Spot rate (USD/NZD) 0.7825/0.7830
Three-month points −12.1/−10.0
Three-month MRR (NZD) 3.31%
Three-month MRR (USD) 0.31%
The mark-to-market value for Laurier Bay’s forward position is closest to:
A. −USD 87,100.
B. +USD 77,437.
C. +USD 79,938.
Solution
C is correct. Laurier Bay sold NZD 10 million forward to the settlement
date at an all-in forward rate of 0.7900 (USD/NZD). To mark this position
to market, the fund would need an offsetting forward transaction involving
buying NZD 10 million three months forward to the settlement date. The
NZD amounts on the settlement date net to zero. For the offsetting forward
contract, because the NZD is the base currency in the USD/NZD quote,
buying NZD forward means paying the offer for both the spot rate and the
forward points. This scenario leads to an all-in three-month forward rate
of 0.7830 − 0.0010 = 0.7820. On the settlement day, Laurier Bay will receive
USD 7,900,000 (NZD 10,000,000 × 0.7900 USD/NZD) from the original for-
ward contract and pay out USD 7,820,000 (NZD 10,000,000 × 0.7820 USD/


=== PAGE 26 ===


20 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
NZD) based on the offsetting forward contract. The result is a net cash flow
on the settlement day of 10,000,000 × (0.7900 − 0.7820) = +USD 80,000.
This is a cash inflow because Laurier Bay sold the NZD forward and the
NZD depreciated against the USD. This USD cash inflow will occur in three
months. To calculate the mark-to-market value of the original forward po-
sition, we need to calculate the present value of this USD cash inflow using
the three-month USD discount rate (we use USD MRR for this purpose):
__U_S_D__ 8_0_, 0_0_0__
= + USD 79, 938.
_90
1 + 0.0031
(360)
4. Now, suppose that instead of having a long exposure to the NZD, Laurier
Bay Capital had a long forward exposure to the USD, which it hedged by
selling USD 10 million forward against the NZD at an all-in forward rate of
0.7900 (USD/NZD). Three months prior to settlement date, it wants to close
out this short USD forward position.
Using the above table, the mark-to-market value for Laurier Bay’s short USD
forward position is closest to:
A. −NZD 141,117.
B. −NZD 139,959.
C. −NZD 87,100.
Solution
B is correct. Laurier Bay initially sold USD 10 million forward, and it will
have to buy USD 10 million forward to the same settlement date (i.e., in
three months’ time) in order to close out the initial position. Buying USD
using the USD/NZD currency pair is the same as selling the NZD. Because
the NZD is the base currency in the USD/NZD quote, selling the NZD
means calculating the bid rate:
0.7825 + (−12.1/10,000) = 0.78129.
At settlement, the USD amounts will net to zero (USD 10 million both
bought and sold). The NZD amounts will not net to zero, however, because
the all-in forward rate changed between the time Laurier Bay initiated the
original position and the time it closed out this position. At initiation, Lau-
rier Bay contracted to sell USD 10 million and receive NZD 12,658,228 (i.e.,
10,000,000/0.7900) on the settlement date. To close out the original forward
contract, Laurier Bay entered into an offsetting forward contract to receive
USD 10 million and pay out NZD 12,799,345 (i.e., 10,000,000/0.78129) at
settlement. The difference between the NZD amounts that Laurier Bay will
receive and pay out on the settlement date equals
NZD 12,658,228 − NZD 12,799,345 = −NZD 141,117.
This is a cash outflow for Laurier Bay because the fund was short the USD
in the original forward position and the USD subsequently appreciated (i.e.,
the NZD subsequently depreciated, because the all-in forward rate in USD/
NZD dropped from 0.7900 to 0.78129). This NZD cash outflow occurs in
three months’ time, and we must calculate its present value using the three-
month NZD MRR:
_−_ N_Z__D_ 1_4_1_, 1_1_7_
= − NZD 139, 959.
_90
1 + 0.0331
(360)


=== PAGE 27 ===


International Parity Conditions 21
INTERNATIONAL PARITY CONDITIONS 6
explain international parity conditions (covered and uncovered
interest rate parity, forward rate parity, purchasing power parity, and
the international Fisher effect)
Having reviewed the basic tools of the FX market, we now turn our focus to how they
are used in practice. At the heart of the trading decision in FX markets lies a view on
equilibrium market prices. An understanding of equilibrium pricing will assist the
investor in framing decisions regarding risk exposures and how they should be managed.
In this and the following sections, we lay out a framework for developing a view on
equilibrium exchange rates. We begin by examining international parity conditions,
which describe the inter-relationships that jointly determine long-run movements
in exchange rates, interest rates, and inflation. These parity conditions are the basic
building blocks for describing long-term equilibrium levels for exchange rates. In
subsequent sections, we expand beyond the parity conditions by discussing other
factors that influence a currency’s value.
Always keep in mind that exchange rate movements reflect complex interactions
among multiple forces. In trying to untangle this complex web of interactions, we
must clearly delineate the following concepts:
1. Long run versus short run: Many of the factors that determine exchange rate
movements exert subtle but persistent influences over long periods of time.
Although a poor guide for short-term prediction, longer-term equilibrium
values act as an anchor for exchange rate movements.
2. Expected versus unexpected changes: In reasonably efficient markets, prices
will adjust to reflect market participants’ expectations of future develop-
ments. When a key factor—say, inflation—is trending gradually in a partic-
ular direction, market pricing will eventually come to reflect expectations
that this trend will continue. In contrast, large, unexpected movements in
a variable (for example, a central bank intervening in the foreign exchange
market) can lead to immediate, discrete price adjustments. This concept is
closely related to risk. For example, a moderate but steady rate of inflation
will not have the same effect on market participants as an inflation rate that
is very unpredictable. The latter clearly describes a riskier financial environ-
ment. Market pricing will reflect risk premiums—that is, the compensation
that traders and investors demand for being exposed to unpredictable out-
comes. Whereas expectations of long-run equilibrium values tend to evolve
slowly, risk premiums—which are closely related to confidence and reputa-
tion—can change quickly in response to unexpected developments.
3. Relative movements: An exchange rate represents the relative price of one
currency in terms of another. Hence, for exchange rate determination, the
level or variability of key factors in any particular country is typically much
less important than the differences in these factors across countries. For
example, knowing that inflation is increasing in Country A may not give
much insight into the direction of the A/B exchange rate without also know-
ing what is happening with the inflation rate in Country B.
As a final word of caution—and this cannot be emphasized enough—there is no
simple formula, model, or approach that will allow market participants to precisely
forecast exchange rates. Models that work well in one period may fail in others. Models
that work for one set of exchange rates may fail to work for others.


=== PAGE 28 ===


22 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Nonetheless, market participants must have a market view to guide their decisions,
even if this view requires significant revision as new information becomes available.
The following sections provide a framework for understanding FX markets, a guide
for thinking through the complex forces driving exchange rates. As with all theory,
however, it does not eliminate the need for insightful analysis of actual economic and
market conditions.
International Parity Conditions
International parity conditions form the building blocks of most models of exchange
rate determination. The key international parity conditions are as follows:
1. covered interest rate parity,
2. uncovered interest rate parity,
3. forward rate parity,
4. purchasing power parity, and
5. the international Fisher effect.
Parity conditions show how expected inflation differentials, interest rate differen-
tials, forward exchange rates, current spot exchange rates, and expected future spot
exchange rates would be linked in an ideal world. These conditions typically make
simplifying assumptions, such as zero transaction costs, perfect information that is
available to all market participants, risk neutrality, and freely adjustable market prices.
Although empirical studies have found that the parity conditions rarely hold in
the short term, they do help form a broadly based, long-term view of exchange rates
and accompanying risk exposures. The exception to the rule that parity conditions
do not hold in the short term is covered interest rate parity, which is the only parity
condition that is enforced by arbitrage. We examine this parity condition first.
7 COVERED AND UNCOVERED INTEREST RATE PARITY
AND FORWARD RATE PARITY
explain international parity conditions (covered and uncovered
interest rate parity, forward rate parity, purchasing power parity, and
the international Fisher effect)
describe relations among the international parity conditions
evaluate the use of the current spot rate, the forward rate,
purchasing power parity, and uncovered interest parity to forecast
future spot exchange rates
We have already discussed covered interest rate parity in our examination of forward
exchange rates. Under this parity condition, an investment in a foreign money market
instrument that is completely hedged against exchange rate risk should yield exactly
the same return as an otherwise identical domestic money market investment. Given
the spot exchange rate and the domestic and foreign yields, the forward exchange
rate must equal the rate that gives these two alternative investment strategies—invest
either in a domestic money market instrument or in a fully currency-hedged foreign
money market instrument—exactly the same holding period return. If one strategy
gave a higher holding period return than the other, then an investor could short-sell


=== PAGE 29 ===


Covered and Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and Forward Rate Parity 23
the lower-yielding approach and invest the proceeds in the higher-yielding approach,
earning riskless arbitrage profits in the process. In real-world financial markets,
such a disparity will be quickly arbitraged away so that no further arbitrage profits
are available. Covered interest rate parity is thus said to be a no-arbitrage condition.
For covered interest rate parity to hold exactly, it must be assumed that there are
zero transaction costs and that the underlying domestic and foreign money market
instruments being compared are identical in terms of liquidity, maturity, and default
risk. Where capital is permitted to flow freely, spot and forward exchange markets
are liquid, and financial market conditions are relatively stress free, covered interest
rate differentials are generally found to be close to zero and covered interest rate
parity holds.
Uncovered Interest Rate Parity
According to the uncovered interest rate parity condition, the expected return on
an uncovered (i.e., unhedged) foreign currency investment should equal the return
on a comparable domestic currency investment. Uncovered interest rate parity states
that the change in spot rate over the investment horizon should, on average, equal the
differential in interest rates between the two countries. That is, the expected apprecia-
tion/depreciation of the exchange rate will just offset the yield differential.
To explain the intuition behind this concept, let’s switch, as we did with the exam-
ples for covered interest rate parity, from the standard price/base currency notation
(P/B) to foreign/domestic currency notation (f/d) in order to emphasize the choice
between foreign and domestic investments. As before, we also will assume that for the
investor, the base currency is the domestic currency. (In covered interest rate parity,
we assumed the investor transacted at a forward rate that was locked in at strategy
initiation. In uncovered interest rate parity, the investor is assumed to transact at a
future spot rate that is unknown at the time the strategy is initiated and the investor’s
currency position in the future is not hedged—that is, uncovered.)
For our example, assume that this investor has a choice between a one-year domestic
money market instrument and an unhedged one-year foreign-currency-denominated
money market investment. Under the assumption of uncovered interest rate parity,
the investor will compare the known return on the domestic investment with the
expected all-in return on the unhedged foreign-currency-denominated investment
(which includes the foreign yield as well as any movements in the exchange rate, in
S terms). The choice between these two investments will depend on which market
f/d
offers the higher expected return on an unhedged basis.
For example, assume that the return on the one-year foreign money market instru-
ment is 10% while the return on the one-year domestic money market instrument is
4%. From the investor’s perspective, the 4% expected return on the one-year domestic
investment in domestic currency terms is known with complete certainty. This is not the
case for the uncovered investment in the foreign currency money market instrument.
In domestic currency terms, the investment return on an uncovered (or unhedged)
foreign-currency-denominated investment is equal to ( 1 + i f ) (1 − %Δ S f /d ) − 1.
Intuitively, the formula says that the investor’s return on a foreign investment is
a function of both the foreign interest rate and the change in the spot rate, whereby
a depreciation in the foreign currency reduces the investor’s return. The percentage
change in S enters with a minus sign because an increase in S means the foreign
f/d f/d
currency declines in value, thereby reducing the all-in return from the domestic cur-
rency perspective of our investor. This all-in return depends on future movements in
the S rate, which cannot be known until the end of the period. This return can be
f/d
approximated by ≅ i − % Δ S .
f f/d


=== PAGE 30 ===


24 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Note that this approximate formula holds because the product (i × %ΔS) is small
compared with the interest rate (i) and the percentage change in the exchange rate
(%ΔS). For simplicity of exposition, we will use the ≅ symbol when we introduce an
approximation but will subsequently treat the relationship as an equality (=) unless
the distinction is important for the issue being discussed.
Using the previous example, consider three cases:
1. The S rate is expected to remain unchanged.
f/d
2. The domestic currency is expected to appreciate by 10%.
3. The domestic currency is expected to appreciate by 6%.
In the first case, the investor would prefer the foreign-currency-denominated
money market investment because it offers a 10% (= 10% − 0%) expected return,
while the comparable domestic investment offers only 4%. In the second case, the
investor would prefer the domestic investment because the expected return on the
foreign-currency-denominated investment is 0% (= 10% − 10%). In the third case,
uncovered interest rate parity holds because both investments offer a 4% (for the
foreign investment, 10% − 6%) expected return. In this case, the risk-neutral investor
is assumed to be indifferent between the alternatives.
Note that in the third case, in which uncovered interest rate parity holds, while the
expected return over the one-year investment horizon is the same for both instruments,
that expected return is just a point on the distribution of possible total return outcomes.
The all-in return on the foreign money market instrument is uncertain because the
future S rate is uncertain. Hence, when we say that the investor would be indifferent
f/d
between owning domestic and foreign investments because they both offer the same
expected return (4%), we are assuming that the investor is risk neutral (risk-neutral
investors base their decisions solely on the expected return and are indifferent to the
investments’ risk). Thus, uncovered interest rate parity assumes that there are enough
risk-neutral investors to force equality of expected returns.
Using our example’s foreign/domestic (f/d) notation, uncovered interest rate parity
says the expected change in the spot exchange rate over the investment horizon should
be reflected in the interest rate differential:
%Δ S e = i − i , (2)
f/d f d
where ∆Se indicates the change in the spot rate expected for future periods.
Note that Equation 2 cannot hold simultaneously for S/ and S / (= 1/S/ ) because
f d d f f d
their percentage changes are not of exactly equal magnitude. This reflects our earlier
approximation. Using the exact return on the unhedged foreign instrument would
alleviate this issue but would produce a less intuitive equation.
In our example, if the yield spread between the foreign and domestic investments is
6% (i − i = 6%), then this spread implicitly reflects the expectation that the domestic
f d
currency will strengthen versus the foreign currency by 6%.
Uncovered interest rate parity assumes that the country with the higher interest
rate or money market yield will see its currency depreciate. The depreciation of the
currency offsets the initial higher yield so that the (expected) all-in return on the two
investment choices is the same. Hence, if the uncovered interest rate parity condition
held consistently in the real world, it would rule out the possibility of earning excess
returns from going long a high-yield currency and going short a low-yield currency:
The depreciation of the high-yield currency would exactly offset the yield advantage
that the high-yield currency offers. Taking this scenario to its logical conclusion, if
uncovered interest rate parity held at all times, investors would have no incentive to
shift capital from one currency to another because expected returns on otherwise
identical money market investments would be equal across markets and risk-neutral
investors would be indifferent among them.


=== PAGE 31 ===


Covered and Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and Forward Rate Parity 25
Most studies have found that over short- and medium-term periods, the rate
of depreciation of the high-yield currency is less than what would be implied by
uncovered interest rate parity. In many cases, high-yield currencies have been found
to strengthen, not weaken. There is, however, evidence that uncovered interest rate
parity works better over very long-term horizons.
Such findings have significant implications for foreign exchange investment strat-
egies. If high-yield currencies do not depreciate in line with the path predicted by the
uncovered interest rate parity condition, then high-yield currencies should exhibit a
tendency to outperform low-yield currencies over time. If so, investors could adopt
strategies that overweight high-yield currencies at the expense of low-yield currencies
and generate attractive returns in the process. Such approaches are known as FX carry
trade strategies. We will discuss them in greater detail later.
Forward Rate Parity
Forward rate parity states that the forward exchange rate will be an unbiased predictor
of the future spot exchange rate. It does not state that the forward rate will be a perfect
forecast, just an unbiased one; the forward rate may overestimate or underestimate
the future spot rate from time to time, but on average, it will equal the future spot
rate. Forward rate parity builds upon two other parity conditions, covered interest
rate parity and uncovered interest rate parity.
The covered interest rate parity condition describes the relationship among the
spot exchange rate, the forward exchange rate, and interest rates. Let’s keep using
the foreign/domestic exchange rate notation (f/d) to simplify the explanation. The
arbitrage condition that underlies covered interest rate parity (illustrated earlier) can
be rearranged to give an expression for the forward premium or discount:
_Actual
_[ 360 ]
F − S = S i − i .
f/d f/d f/d _Actual (f d)
(1 + i )
d[ 360 ]
The domestic currency will trade at a forward premium (F > S ) if, and only if,
f/d f/d
the foreign risk-free interest rate exceeds the domestic risk-free interest rate (i > i ).
f d
For the sake of simplicity, we assume that the investment horizon is one year, so that
i − i
_f d
F − S = S .
f/d f/d f/d(1 + i )
d
Because the 1 + i denominator will be close to 1, we can approximate the above
d
equation as follows:
F f /d − S f /d ≅ S f /d ( i f − i d ) .
This covered interest rate parity equation can be rearranged to show the forward
discount or premium as a percentage of the spot rate:
F − S
_f/d f/d
S ≅ i f − i d .
f/d
We have also shown that if uncovered interest rate parity holds, then the expected
change in the spot rate is equal to the interest rate differential:
%Δ S e = i − i .
f/d f d
We can link the covered interest rate parity and uncovered interest rate parity
equations as follows:
F − S
_ f/d f/d = %Δ S e = i − i .
S f/d f d
f/d


=== PAGE 32 ===


26 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Thus, the forward premium (discount) on a currency, expressed in percentage
terms, equals the expected percentage appreciation (depreciation) of the domestic
currency (assuming that the uncovered interest rate parity condition holds).
In theory, then, the forward exchange rate will be an unbiased forecast of the future
spot exchange rate if both covered and uncovered interest rate parity hold:
F = S e .
f/d f/d
This condition is often referred to as forward rate parity.
We know covered interest rate parity must hold because it is enforced by arbitrage.
The question of whether forward rate parity holds is thus dependent upon whether
uncovered interest rate parity holds.
How might uncovered interest rate parity be enforced? It is not enforced by arbi-
trage because there is no combination of trades that will lock in a (riskless) profit.
It could, however, hold if speculators willing to take risk enter the market. If the
forward rate is above (below) speculators’ expectations of the future spot rate, then
risk-neutral speculators will buy the domestic currency in the spot (forward) market
and simultaneously sell it in the forward (spot) market. These transactions would
push the forward premium into alignment with the consensus expectation of the
future spot rate. If the speculators’ expectations are correct, they will make a profit.
Note, however, that spot exchange rates are volatile and determined by a complex
web of influences: Interest rate differentials are only one among many factors. So,
speculators can also lose. Because speculators are rarely, if ever, truly risk neutral
and without an arbitrage relationship to enforce it, uncovered interest rate parity is
often violated. As a result, we can conclude that forward exchange rates are typically
poor predictors of future spot exchange rates in the short run. Over the longer term,
uncovered interest rate parity and forward rate parity have more empirical support.
EXAMPLE 4
Covered and Uncovered Interest Rate Parity: Predictors of
Future Spot Rates
An Australia-based fixed-income asset manager is deciding how to allocate money
between Australia and Japan. Note that the base currency in the exchange rate
quote (AUD) is the domestic currency for the asset manager.
JPY/AUD spot rate (mid-market) 71.78
One-year forward points (mid-market) −139.4
One-year Australian deposit rate 3.00%
One-year Japanese deposit rate 1.00%
1. Based on uncovered interest rate parity, over the next year, the expected
change in the JPY/AUD rate is closest to a(n):
A. decrease of 6%.
B. decrease of 2%.
C. increase of 2%.
Solution
B is correct. The expected depreciation of the Australian dollar (decline in
the JPY/AUD rate) is equal to the interest rate differential between Australia
and Japan (3% − 1%).


=== PAGE 33 ===


Covered and Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and Forward Rate Parity 27
2. The best explanation of why this prediction may not be very accurate is that:
A. covered interest rate parity does hold in this case.
B. the forward points indicate that a riskless arbitrage opportunity exists.
C. there is no arbitrage condition that forces uncovered interest rate
parity to hold.
Solution
C is correct. There is no arbitrage condition that forces uncovered interest
rate parity to hold. In contrast, arbitrage virtually always ensures that cov-
ered interest rate parity holds. This is the case for our table, where the −139
point discount is calculated from the covered interest rate parity equation.
3. Using the forward points to forecast the future JPY/AUD spot rate one year
ahead assumes that:
A. investors are risk neutral.
B. spot rates follow a random walk.
C. it is not necessary for uncovered interest rate parity to hold.
Solution
A is correct. Using forward rates (i.e., adding the forward points to the
spot rate) to forecast future spot rates assumes that uncovered interest rate
parity and forward rate parity hold. Uncovered interest rate parity assumes
that investors are risk neutral. If these conditions hold, then movements in
the spot exchange rate, although they approximate a random walk, will not
actually be a random walk because current interest spreads will determine
expected exchange rate movements.
4. Forecasting that the JPY/AUD spot rate one year from now will equal 71.78
assumes that:
A. investors are risk neutral.
B. spot rates follow a random walk.
C. it is necessary for uncovered interest rate parity to hold.
Solution
B is correct. Assuming that the current spot exchange rate is the best pre-
dictor of future spot rates assumes that exchange rate movements follow a
random walk. If uncovered interest rate parity holds, the current exchange
rate will not be the best predictor unless the interest rate differential hap-
pens to be zero. Risk neutrality is needed to enforce uncovered interest rate
parity, but it will not make the current spot exchange rate the best predictor
of future spot rates.
5. If the asset manager completely hedged the currency risk associated with a
one-year Japanese deposit using a forward rate contract, the one-year all-in
holding return, in AUD, would be closest to:
A. 0%.
B. 1%.
C. 3%.
Solution
C is correct. A fully hedged JPY investment would provide the same return
as the AUD investment: 3%. This represents covered interest rate parity, an
arbitrage condition.


=== PAGE 34 ===


28 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
6. The fixed-income manager collects the following information and uses it,
along with the international parity conditions, to estimate investment re-
turns and future exchange rate movements.
Today’s One-Year MRR Currency Pair Spot Rate Today
JPY 0.10% JPY/USD 105.40
USD 0.10% USD/GBP 1.2303
GBP 3.00% JPY/GBP 129.67
If covered interest rate parity holds, the all-in one-year investment return to
a Japanese investor whose currency exposure to the GBP is fully hedged is
closest to:
A. 0.10%.
B. 0.17%.
C. 3.00%.
Solution
A is correct. If covered interest rate parity holds (and it very likely does,
because this is a pure arbitrage relationship), then the all-in investment
return to a Japanese investor in a one-year, fully hedged GBP MRR position
would be identical to a one-year JPY MRR position: 0.10%. No calculations
are necessary.
7. If uncovered interest rate parity holds, today’s expected value for the JPY/
GBP currency pair one year from now would be closest to:
A. 126.02.
B. 129.67.
C. 130.05.
Solution
A is correct. If uncovered interest rate parity holds, then forward rate parity
will hold and the expected spot rate one year forward is equal to the one-
year forward exchange rate. This forward rate is calculated in the usual
manner, given the spot exchange rates and MRRs:
Se = F = 129.67(1.001/1.03) = 126.02.
8. If uncovered interest rate parity holds, between today and one year from
now, the expected movement in the JPY/USD currency pair is closest to:
A. −1.60%.
B. +0.00%.
C. +1.63%.
Solution
B is correct. Given uncovered interest rate parity, the expected change in a
spot exchange rate is equal to the interest rate differential. At the one-year
term, there is no difference between USD MRR and JPY MRR.


=== PAGE 35 ===


Purchasing Power Parity 29
PURCHASING POWER PARITY 8
explain international parity conditions (covered and uncovered
interest rate parity, forward rate parity, purchasing power parity, and
the international Fisher effect)
describe relations among the international parity conditions
evaluate the use of the current spot rate, the forward rate,
purchasing power parity, and uncovered interest parity to forecast
future spot exchange rates
So far, we have looked at the relationship between exchange rates and interest rate
differentials. Now, we turn to examining the relationship between exchange rates and
inflation differentials. The basis for this relationship is known as purchasing power
parity (PPP).
Various versions of PPP exist. The foundation for all of the versions is the law
of one price. According to the law of one price, identical goods should trade at the
same price across countries when valued in terms of a common currency. To simplify
the explanation, as we did with our examples for covered and uncovered interest rate
parity, let’s continue to use the foreign/domestic currency quote convention (f/d) and
the case where the base currency in the P/B notation is the domestic currency for the
investor in the f/d notation.
x
The law of one price asserts that the foreign price of good x, P , should equal the
f
x
exchange rate–adjusted price of the identical good in the domestic country, P :
d
P x = S × P x .
f f/d d
For example, for a euro-based consumer, if the price of good x in the euro area is EUR
100 and the nominal exchange rate stands at 1.15 USD/EUR, then the price of good
x in the United States should equal USD 115.
The absolute version of PPP simply extends the law of one price to the broad
range of goods and services that are consumed in different countries. Expanding our
example above to include all goods and services, not just good x, the broad price level
of the foreign country (P) should equal the currency-adjusted broad price level in
f
the domestic country (P ):
d
P = (S )(P ).
f f/d d
This equation implicitly assumes that all domestic and foreign goods are tradable and
that the domestic and foreign price indexes include the same bundle of goods and
services with the same exact weights in each country. Rearranging this equation and
solving for the nominal exchange rate (S ), the absolute version of PPP states that
f/d
the nominal exchange rate will be determined by the ratio of the foreign and domestic
broad price indexes:
S = P/P .
f/d f d
The absolute version of PPP asserts that the equilibrium exchange rate between two
countries is determined entirely by the ratio of their national price levels. However, it
is highly unlikely that this relationship actually holds in the real world. The absolute
version of PPP assumes that goods arbitrage will equate the prices of all goods and
service across countries, but if transaction costs are significant and/or not all goods
and services are tradable, then goods arbitrage will be incomplete. Hence, sizable and
persistent departures from absolute PPP are likely.


=== PAGE 36 ===


30 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
However, if it is assumed that transaction costs and other trade impediments are
constant over time, it might be possible to show that changes in exchange rates and
changes in national price levels are related, even if the relationship between exchange
rate levels and national price levels does not hold. According to the relative version
of PPP, the percentage change in the spot exchange rate (%ΔS ) will be completely
f/d
determined by the difference between the foreign and domestic inflation rates (π − π ):
f d
%Δ S f /d ≅ π f − π d . (3)
Intuitively, the relative version of PPP implies that the exchange rate changes to offset
changes in competitiveness arising from inflation differentials. For example, if the
foreign inflation rate is assumed to be 9% while the domestic inflation rate is assumed
to be 5%, then the S exchange rate must rise by 4% (%ΔS = 9% − 5% = 4%) in
f/d f/d
order to maintain the relative competitiveness of the two regions: The currency of the
high-inflation country should depreciate relative to the currency of the low-inflation
country. If the S exchange rate remained unchanged, the higher foreign inflation rate
f/d
would erode the competitiveness of foreign companies relative to domestic companies.
Conversion from Absolute Levels to a Rate of Change
We will occasionally need to convert from a relationship expressed in levels of
the relevant variables to a relationship among rates of change. If X = (Y × Z), then
(1 + %ΔX) = (1 + %ΔY)(1 + %ΔZ)
and
%ΔX ≈ %ΔY + %ΔZ
because (%ΔY × %ΔZ) is “small.” Similarly, it can be shown that if X = (Y/Z), then
(1 + %ΔX) = (1 + %ΔY)/(1 + %ΔZ)
and
%ΔX ≈ %ΔY − %ΔZ.
Applying this conversion to the equation for absolute PPP gives Equation 3.
Whereas the relative version of PPP focuses on actual changes in exchange rates
being driven by actual differences in national inflation rates, the ex ante version of
PPP asserts that the expected changes in the spot exchange rate are entirely driven
by expected differences in national inflation rates. Ex ante PPP tells us that countries
that are expected to run persistently high inflation rates should expect to see their
currencies depreciate over time, while countries that are expected to run relatively low
inflation rates on a sustainable basis should expect to see their currencies appreciate
over time. Ex ante PPP can be expressed as
%Δ S e = π e − π e , (4)
f/d f d
where it is understood that the use of expectations (the superscript e) indicates
e
that we are now focused on future periods. That is, % Δ S represents the expected
f/d
e e
percentage change in the spot exchange rate, while π and π represent the expected
d f
domestic and foreign inflation rates over the same period.
Studies have found that while over shorter horizons nominal exchange rate move-
ments may appear random, over longer time horizons nominal exchange rates tend to
gravitate toward their long-run PPP equilibrium values.


=== PAGE 37 ===


Purchasing Power Parity 31
Exhibit 2 illustrates the success, or lack thereof, of the relative version of PPP at
different time horizons: 1 year, 5 years, 10 years, and 15 years for a selection of coun-
tries over the period 1990-2020. Each chart plots the inflation differential (vertical
axis) against the percentage change in the exchange rate (horizontal axis). If PPP
holds, the points should fall along an upward-sloping diagonal line. The first panel
of Exhibit 2 indicates no clear relationship between changes in exchange rates and
inflation differentials at the one-year time horizon. As the time horizon is lengthened
to five years and beyond, however, a strong positive relationship becomes apparent.
Hence, PPP appears to be a valid framework for assessing long-run fair value in the
FX markets, even though the path to PPP equilibrium may be slow.
Exhibit 2: Effect of Relative Inflation Rates on Exchange Rates at Different
Time Horizons
A. 1-Year Intervals B. 6-Year Intervals
Average Annual Average Annual
Inflation Differential Inflation Differential
50 50
40 40
30 30
20 20
10 10
0 0
–10 –10
–20 –20
–30 –30
–40 –40
–50 –50
–50–40–30–20–10 0 10 20 30 40 50 –50–40–30–20–10 0 10 20 30 40 50
Annual Change in Exchange Rate (%) Annual Change in Exchange Rate (%)
C. 12-Year Intervals D. 24-Year Intervals
Average Annual Average Annual
Inflation Differential Inflation Differential
50 50
40 40
30 30
20 20
10 10
0 0
–10 –10
–20 –20
–30 –30
–40 –40
–50 –50
–50–40–30–20–10 0 10 20 30 40 50 –50–40–30–20–10 0 10 20 30 40 50
Annual Change in Exchange Rate (%) Annual Change in Exchange Rate (%)
Exhibit 3 illustrates the success of the relative version of PPP even in the short run
when differences in inflation rates between countries are large. Note that the Brazilian
Real-USD exchange rate changes rapidly in the period 1980-1993, mirroring the very
large differences in relative inflation between hyperinflationary Brazil and low infla-
tion rate United States. It also indicates that the majority countries did not have large


=== PAGE 38 ===


32 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
inflation differentials with the United States, and so 1-year changes in exchange rates
cluster near the origin. This mirrors the upper left panel in Exhibit 2 above, which
excludes Brazil from the sample of countries.
Exhibit 3: Effect of Large Differences in Inflation Rates on Exchange Rates
over 1-Year Time Horizons
REAL/USD Differences in Inflation Rates
3.5 600
400
3.0
200
2.5
0
–200
2.0
Exchange Rate –400
(left axis)
1.5 Differential
(right axis) –600
1.0 –800
77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90
9 THE FISHER EFFECT, REAL INTEREST RATE PARITY,
AND INTERNATIONAL PARITY CONDITIONS
explain international parity conditions (covered and uncovered
interest rate parity, forward rate parity, purchasing power parity, and
the international Fisher effect)
describe relations among the international parity conditions
evaluate the use of the current spot rate, the forward rate,
purchasing power parity, and uncovered interest parity to forecast
future spot exchange rates
explain approaches to assessing the long-run fair value of an
exchange rate
So far, we have examined the relationships between exchange rates and interest rate
differentials and between exchange rates and inflation differentials. Now, we will begin
to bring these concepts together by examining how exchange rates, interest rates, and
inflation rates interact.
According to what economists call the Fisher effect, one can break down the
nominal interest rate (i) in a given country into two parts: (1) the real interest rate
(r) in that particular country and (2) the expected inflation rate (πe) in that country:


=== PAGE 39 ===


The Fisher Effect, Real Interest Rate Parity, and International Parity Conditions 33
i = r + πe.
To relate this concept to exchange rates, we can write the Fisher equation for both
the domestic country and a foreign country. If the Fisher effect holds, the nominal
interest rates in both countries will equal the sum of their respective real interest rates
and expected inflation rates:
i = r + π e .
d d d
i = r + π e .
f f f
Let’s take a closer look at the macroeconomic forces that drive the trend in nominal
yield spreads. Subtracting the top equation from the bottom equation shows that
the nominal yield spread between the foreign and domestic countries (i − i ) equals
f d
the sum of two parts: (1) the foreign–domestic real yield spread (r − r ) and (2) the
f d
e e
foreign–domestic expected inflation differential ( π − π ):
f d
i f − i d = ( r f − r d ) + ( π f e − π d e ) .
We can rearrange this equation to solve for the real interest rate differential instead
of the nominal interest rate differential:
( r f − r d ) = ( i f − i d ) − ( π f e − π d e ) .
To tie this material to our previous work on exchange rates, recall our expression for
uncovered interest rate parity:
%Δ S e = i − i .
f/d f d
The nominal interest rate spread (i − i ) equals the expected change in the exchange
f d
e
rate (% Δ S ).
f/d
Recall also the expression for ex ante PPP:
%Δ S e = π e − π e .
f/d f d
The difference in expected inflation rates equals the expected change in the exchange
rate. Combining these two expressions, we derive the following:
i − i = π e − π e .
f d f d
The nominal interest rate spread is equal to the difference in expected inflation rates.
We can therefore conclude that if uncovered interest rate parity and ex ante PPP hold,
(r − r ) = 0.
f d
The real yield spread between the domestic and foreign countries (r − r ) will be zero,
f d
and the level of real interest rates in the domestic country will be identical to the level
of real interest rates in the foreign country.
The proposition that real interest rates will converge to the same level across
different markets is known as the real interest rate parity condition.
Finally, if real interest rates are equal across markets, then it also follows that the
foreign–domestic nominal yield spread is determined solely by the foreign–domestic
expected inflation differential:
i − i = π e − π e .
f d f d
This is known as the international Fisher effect. The reader should be aware that
some authors refer to uncovered interest rate parity as the “international Fisher effect.”
We reserve this term for the relationship between nominal interest rate differentials
and expected inflation differentials because the original (domestic) Fisher effect is a
relationship between interest rates and expected inflation.


=== PAGE 40 ===


34 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
The international Fisher effect and, by extension, real interest rate parity assume
that currency risk is the same throughout the world. However, not all currencies carry
the same risk. For example, an emerging country may have a high level of indebtedness,
which could result in an elevated level of currency risk (i.e., likelihood of currency
depreciation). In this case, because the emerging market currency has higher risk,
subtracting the expected inflation rate from the nominal interest rate will result in a
calculated real interest rate that is higher than in other countries. Economists typically
separate the nominal interest rate into the real interest rate, an inflation premium,
and a risk premium. The emerging country’s investors will require a risk premium
for holding the currency, which will be reflected in nominal and real interest rates
that are higher than would be expected under the international Fisher effect and real
interest rate parity conditions.
EXAMPLE 5
PPP and the International Fisher Effect
An Australia-based fixed-income investment manager is deciding how to allocate
her portfolio between Australia and Japan. (As before, the AUD is the domestic
currency.) Australia’s one-year deposit rate is 3%, considerably higher than Japan’s
1% rate, but the Australian dollar is estimated to be roughly 10% overvalued
relative to the Japanese yen based on purchasing power parity. Before making her
asset allocation, the investment manager considers the implications of interest
rate differentials and PPP imbalances.
1. All else equal, which of the following events would restore the Australian
dollar to its PPP value?
A. The Japanese inflation rate increases by 2%.
B. The Australian inflation rate decreases by 10%.
C. The JPY/AUD exchange rate declines by 10%.
Solution
C is correct. If the Australian dollar is overvalued by 10% on a PPP basis,
with all else held equal, a depreciation of the JPY/AUD rate by 10% would
move the Australian dollar back to equilibrium.
2. If real interest rates in Japan and Australia were equal, then under the
international Fisher effect, the inflation rate differential between Japan and
Australia would be closest to:
A. 0%.
B. 2%.
C. 10%.
Solution
B is correct. If the real interest rates were equal, then the difference in nomi-
nal yields would be explained by the difference in inflation rates (3% − 1%).
3. According to the theory and empirical evidence of purchasing power parity,
which of the following would not be true if PPP holds in the long run?
A. An exchange rate’s equilibrium path should be determined by the
long-term trend in domestic price levels relative to foreign price levels.


=== PAGE 41 ===


The Fisher Effect, Real Interest Rate Parity, and International Parity Conditions 35
B. Deviations from PPP might occur over short- and medium-term peri-
ods, but fundamental forces should eventually work to push exchange
rates toward their long-term PPP path.
C. High-inflation countries should tend to see their currencies appreciate
over time.
Solution
C is correct. According to PPP, high-inflation countries should see their cur-
rencies depreciate (at least, over the longer term) in order to re-equilibrate
real purchasing power between countries.
4. Which of the following would best explain the failure of the absolute version
of PPP to hold?
A. Inflation rates vary across countries.
B. Real interest rates are converging across countries.
C. Trade barriers exist, and different product mixes are consumed across
countries.
Solution
C is correct. The absolute version of PPP assumes that all goods and ser-
vices are tradable and that the domestic and foreign price indexes include
the same bundle of goods and services with the same exact weights in each
country.
International Parity Conditions: Tying All the Pieces Together
As noted above, the various parity relationships usually do not hold over short time
horizons. However, studies show that over longer time periods, there is a discern-
ible interaction among nominal interest rates, exchange rates, and inflation rates
across countries, such that the international parity conditions serve as an anchor for
longer-term exchange rate movements. We now summarize the key international
parity conditions and describe how they are all linked.
1. According to covered interest rate parity, arbitrage ensures that nominal
interest rate spreads equal the percentage forward premium (or discount).
2. According to uncovered interest rate parity, the expected percentage change
of the spot exchange rate should, on average, be reflected in the nominal
interest rate spread.
3. If both covered and uncovered interest rate parity hold—that is, the nom-
inal yield spread equals both the forward premium (or discount) and the
expected percentage change in the spot exchange rate—then the forward
exchange rate will be an unbiased predictor of the future spot exchange rate.
4. According to the ex ante PPP approach to exchange rate determination, the
expected change in the spot exchange rate should equal the expected differ-
ence between domestic and foreign inflation rates.
5. Assuming the Fisher effect holds in all markets—that is, the nominal inter-
est rate in each market equals the real interest rate plus the expected infla-
tion rate—and also assuming that real interest rates are broadly the same
across all markets (real interest rate parity), then the nominal yield spread
between domestic and foreign markets will equal the domestic–foreign
expected inflation differential, which is the international Fisher effect.


=== PAGE 42 ===


36 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
6. If ex ante PPP and the international Fisher effect hold, then expected infla-
tion differentials should equal both the expected change in the exchange
rate and the nominal interest rate differential. This relationship implies that
the expected change in the exchange rate equals the nominal interest rate
differential, which is uncovered interest rate parity.
In sum, if all the key international parity conditions held at all times, then the
expected percentage change in the spot exchange rate would equal
■ the forward premium or discount (expressed in percentage terms),
■ the nominal yield spread between countries, and
■ the difference between expected national inflation rates.
In other words, if all these parity conditions held, it would be impossible for a global
investor to earn consistent profits on currency movements. If forward exchange rates
accurately predicted the future path of spot exchange rates, there would be no way
to make money in forward exchange speculation. If high-yield currencies fell in value
versus low-yield currencies exactly in line with the path implied by nominal interest
rate spreads, all markets would offer the same currency-adjusted total returns over
time. Investors would have no incentive to shift funds from one market to another
based solely on currency considerations.
EXAMPLE 6
The Relationships among the International Parity
Conditions
1. Which of the following is a no-arbitrage condition?
A. Real interest rate parity
B. Covered interest rate parity
C. Uncovered interest rate parity
Solution
B is correct. Covered interest rate parity is enforced by equating the invest-
ment return on two riskless investments (domestic and currency-hedged
foreign).
2. Forward rates are unbiased predictors of future spot rates if two parity con-
ditions hold. Which of the following is not one of these conditions?
A. Real interest rate parity
B. Covered interest rate parity
C. Uncovered interest rate parity
Solution
A is correct. Both covered and uncovered interest rate parity must hold for
the forward rate to be an unbiased predictor of the future spot rate. Real
interest rate parity is not required.
3. The international Fisher effect requires all but which of the following to
hold?
A. Ex ante PPP
B. Absolute PPP


=== PAGE 43 ===


The Carry Trade 37
C. Real interest rate parity
Solution
B is correct. The international Fisher effect is based on real interest rate
parity and ex ante PPP (not absolute PPP).
4. The forward premium/discount is determined by nominal interest rate dif-
ferentials because of:
A. the Fisher effect.
B. covered interest parity.
C. real interest rate parity.
Solution
B is correct. The forward premium/discount is determined by covered inter-
est rate arbitrage.
5. If all of the key international parity conditions held at all times, then the
expected percentage change in the spot exchange rate would equal all except
which of the following?
A. The real yield spread
B. The nominal yield spread
C. The expected inflation spread
Solution
A is correct. If all the international parity conditions held, the real yield
spread would equal zero, regardless of expected changes in the spot ex-
change rate.
THE CARRY TRADE 10
describe the carry trade and its relation to uncovered interest rate
parity and calculate the profit from a carry trade
According to uncovered interest rate parity, high-yield currencies are expected to
depreciate in value, while low-yield currencies are expected to appreciate in value. If
uncovered interest rate parity held at all times, investors would not be able to profit
from a strategy that undertook long positions in high-yield currencies and short posi-
tions in low-yield currencies. The change in spot rates over the tenor of the forward
contracts would cancel out the interest rate differentials locked in at the inception
of the position.
Uncovered interest rate parity is one of the most widely tested propositions in
international finance. The evidence suggests that uncovered interest rate parity does
not hold over short and medium time periods. Studies have generally found that
high-yield currencies, on average, have not depreciated and low-yield currencies have
not appreciated to the levels predicted by interest rate differentials.
These findings underscore the potential profitability of a trading strategy known
as the FX carry trade, which involves taking long positions in high-yield currencies
and short positions in low-yield currencies. The latter are often referred to as “funding
currencies.” As a simplified example of the carry trade, assume a trader can borrow


=== PAGE 44 ===


38 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Canadian dollars at 1% and earn 9% on an investment in Brazilian reals for one year.
To execute the trade to earn 8% from the interest rate differential, the trader will do
the following:
1. Borrow Canadian dollars at t = 0.
2. Sell the dollars and buy Brazilian reals at the spot rate at t = 0.
3. Invest in a real-denominated investment at t = 0.
4. Liquidate the Brazilian investment at t = 1.
5. Sell the reals and buy dollars at the spot rate at t = 1.
6. Pay back the dollar loan.
If the real appreciates, the trader’s profits will be greater than 8% because the stron-
ger real will buy more dollars in one year. If the real depreciates, the trader’s profits
will be less than 8% because the weaker real will buy fewer dollars in the future. If the
real falls in value by more than 8%, the trader will experience losses. The carry trader’s
return consists of the intermarket yield spread, the currency appreciation/deprecia-
tion, and the foreign investment appreciation/depreciation. Typically, a carry trade is
executed using an investment in highly rated government debt so as to mitigate credit
risk. In this simplified example, we use an additive approach to determine the trader’s
returns (i.e., we ignore the currency gain or loss on the 8% interest rate differential).
Historical evidence shows that carry trade strategies have generated positive returns
over extended periods (see for example Dimson, Marsh, McGinnie, Staunton, and
Wilmot 2012). One argument for the persistence of the carry trade is that the yields in
higher interest rate countries reflect a risk premium due to a more unstable economy,
while low-yield currencies represent less risky markets. Although small increases in
financial market and/or FX volatility are unlikely to materially affect carry strategy
profits, elevated levels of volatility and/or perceived risk in the financial markets can
quickly turn these profits into substantial losses. That is, during turbulent periods,
the returns on long high-yield currency positions will tend to decline dramatically,
while the losses on short low-yield currency positions will tend to rise dramatically.
To understand why, we need to understand the nature of the risk and reward in
the carry trade. The reward is the gradual accrual of the interest rate differential—
income that is unrelated to exchange rate volatility. The risk arises from the potential
for sudden adverse exchange rate movements that result in instantaneous capital
losses. During periods of low turbulence, investors may feel relatively confident that
exchange rate movements will not jeopardize the gradual accrual of the interest rate
differential. Because low-volatility regimes have tended to be the norm and often last
for extended periods, investors can become complacent, taking on larger carry trade
positions in a search for yield but increasing their risk exposures. When volatility in
the currency markets spikes, however, the risk of an adverse exchange rate move-
ment rises sharply relative to the gradual flow of income. As the trade moves toward
unprofitability, investors may rush to unwind the carry trade, selling high-yielding
currencies and re-purchasing low-yielding currencies. These carry trades are often
large-scale trades initiated by trading firms and other opportunistic investors, such as
hedge funds. Traders often have stop-loss orders in place that are triggered when price
declines reach a certain level. When they all attempt to unwind the trades at once,
the selling pressure adds to the losses on the long position currency and the buying
pressure on the short position currency drives that currency higher, exacerbating
the loss. The “flight to quality” during turbulent times and the leverage inherent in
the carry trade further compound the losses. The upshot is that during periods of low
volatility, carry trades tend to generate positive returns, but they are prone to significant
crash risk in turbulent times.


=== PAGE 45 ===


The Carry Trade 39
The tendency for carry trades to experience periodic crashes results in a non-normal
distribution of returns for both developed and emerging market (EM) carry trades.
Relative to a normal distribution, the distributions tend to be more peaked, with
fatter tails and negative skewness. The more peaked distribution around the mean
implies that carry trades have typically generated a larger number of trades with small
gains/losses than would occur with the normal distribution. Although carry trades
have generated positive returns on average in the past, the negative skew and fat tails
indicate that carry trades have tended to have more frequent and larger losses than
would have been experienced had the return distribution been normal.
EXAMPLE 7
Carry Trade Strategies
A currency fund manager is considering allocating a portion of her FX portfolio
to carry trade strategies. The fund’s investment committee asks the manager a
number of questions about why she has chosen to become involved in FX carry
trades and how she will manage the risk of potentially large downside moves
associated with the unwinding of carry trades. Which of the following would
be her best responses to the investment committee’s questions?
1. Carry trades can be profitable when:
A. covered interest rate parity does not hold.
B. uncovered interest rate parity does not hold.
C. the international Fisher effect does not hold.
Solution
B is correct. The carry trade is based on the supposition that uncovered
interest rate parity does not hold.
2. Over time, the return distribution of the fund’s FX carry trades is most likely
to resemble a:
A. normal distribution with fat tails.
B. distribution with fat tails and a negative skew.
C. distribution with thin tails and a positive skew.
Solution
B is correct. The “crash risk” of carry trades implies a fat-tailed distribution
skewed toward a higher probability of large losses (compared with a normal
distribution).
3. The volatility of the fund’s returns relative to its equity base is best explained
by:
A. leverage.
B. low deposit rates in the funding currency.
C. the yield spread between the high- and low-yielding currencies.
Solution
A is correct. Carry trades are leveraged trades (borrow in the funding cur-
rency, invest in the high-yield currency), and leverage increases the volatility
in the investor’s return on equity.


=== PAGE 46 ===


40 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
4. A Tokyo-based asset manager enters into a carry trade position based on
borrowing in yen and investing in one-year Australian MRR.
Spot Rate Spot Rate One
Today’s One-Year MRR Currency Pair Today Year Later
JPY 0.10% JPY/USD 105.40 104.60
AUD 1.70% USD/AUD 0.6810 0.6850
After one year, the all-in return to this trade, measured in JPY terms, would
be closest to:
A. +0.03%.
B. +1.53%.
C. +1.63%.
Solution
B is correct. To calculate the all-in return for a Japanese investor in a one-
year AUD MRR deposit, we must first calculate the current and one-year-
later JPY/AUD cross rates. Because USD 1.0000 buys JPY 105.40 today
and AUD 1.0000 buys USD 0.6810 today, today’s JPY/AUD cross rate is the
product of these two numbers: 105.40 × 0.6810 = 71.78 (rounded to two
decimal places). Similarly, one year later, the observed cross rate is 104.60 ×
0.6850 = 71.65 (rounded to two decimal places).
Accordingly, measured in yen, the investment return for the unhedged Aus-
tralian MRR deposit is
(1/71.78)(1 + 1.70%)71.65 − 1 = 0.0152.
Against this 1.52% gross return, however, the manager must charge the
borrowing costs to fund the carry trade investment (one-year JPY MRR was
0.10%). Hence, the net return on the carry trade is 1.52% − 0.10% = 1.42%.
We can also calculate the profit using a transactional approach. Assuming
an initial position of, for example, 100 yen (JPY 100), the investor will obtain
JPY 100 × 1/JPY 71.78 = AUD 1.3931. After one year, the investment will
be worth AUD 1.3931 × 1.017 = AUD 1.4168. Converting back to yen in
one year results in AUD 1.4168 × JPY 71.65/AUD = JPY 101.51. Paying off
the yen loan results in a profit of JPY 101.51 − (JPY 100 × 1.001) = JPY 1.41.
This is equivalent to the 1.42% profit calculated previously (slight difference
arising due to rounding).
11 THE IMPACT OF BALANCE OF PAYMENTS FLOWS
explain how flows in the balance of payment accounts affect
currency exchange rates
As noted earlier, the parity conditions may be appropriate for assessing fair value for
currencies over long horizons, but they are of little use as a real-time gauge of value.
There have been many attempts to find a better framework for determining a curren-
cy’s short- or long-run equilibrium value. In this section, we examine the influence
of trade and capital flows.


=== PAGE 47 ===


The Impact of Balance of Payments Flows 41
A country’s balance of payments consists of its current account as well as its capital
and financial account. The official balance of payments accounts make a distinction
between the “capital account” and the “financial account” based on the nature of the
assets involved. For simplicity, we will use the term “capital account” here to reflect
all investment/financing flows. Loosely speaking, the current account reflects flows
in the real economy, which refers to that part of the economy engaged in the actual
production of goods and services (as opposed to the financial sector). The capital
account reflects financial flows. Decisions about trade flows (the current account)
and investment/financing flows (the capital account) are typically made by different
entities with different perspectives and motivations. Their decisions are brought into
alignment by changes in market prices and/or quantities. One of the key prices—
perhaps the key price—in this process is the exchange rate.
Countries that import more than they export will have a negative current account
balance and are said to have current account deficits. Those with more exports than
imports will have a current account surplus. A country’s current account balance must
be matched by an equal and opposite balance in the capital account. Thus, countries
with current account deficits must attract funds from abroad in order to pay for the
imports (i.e., they must have a capital account surplus).
When discussing the effect of the balance of payments components on a country’s
exchange rate, one must distinguish between short- and intermediate-term influences
on the one hand and longer-term influences on the other. Over the long term, countries
that run persistent current account deficits (net borrowers) often see their currencies
depreciate because they finance their acquisition of imports through the continued
use of debt. Similarly, countries that run persistent current account surpluses (net
lenders) often see their currencies appreciate over time.
However, investment/financing decisions are usually the dominant factor in deter-
mining exchange rate movements, at least in the short to intermediate term. There
are four main reasons for this:
■ Prices of real goods and services tend to adjust much more slowly than
exchange rates and other asset prices.
■ Production of real goods and services takes time, and demand decisions
are subject to substantial inertia. In contrast, liquid financial markets allow
virtually instantaneous redirection of financial flows.
■ Current spending/production decisions reflect only purchases/sales of
current production, while investment/financing decisions reflect not only
the financing of current expenditures but also the reallocation of existing
portfolios.
■ Expected exchange rate movements can induce very large short-term capital
flows. This tends to make the actual exchange rate very sensitive to the cur-
rency views held by owners/managers of liquid assets.
In this section, we first examine the impact of current account imbalances on
exchange rates. Then, we take a closer look at capital flows.
Current Account Imbalances and the Determination of
Exchange Rates
Current account trends influence the path of exchange rates over time through several
mechanisms:
■ The flow supply/demand channel
■ The portfolio balance channel
■ The debt sustainability channel


=== PAGE 48 ===


42 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
We briefly discuss each of these mechanisms next.
The Flow Supply/Demand Channel
The flow supply/demand channel is based on a fairly simple model that focuses on the
fact that purchases and sales of internationally traded goods and services require the
exchange of domestic and foreign currencies in order to arrange payment for those
goods and services. For example, if a country sold more goods and services than it
purchased (i.e., the country was running a current account surplus), then the demand
for its currency should rise, and vice versa. Such shifts in currency demand should
exert upward pressure on the value of the surplus nation’s currency and downward
pressure on the value of the deficit nation’s currency.
Hence, countries with persistent current account surpluses should see their cur-
rencies appreciate over time, and countries with persistent current account deficits
should see their currencies depreciate over time. A logical question, then, would be
whether such trends can go on indefinitely. At some point, domestic currency strength
should contribute to deterioration in the trade competitiveness of the surplus nation,
while domestic currency weakness should contribute to an improvement in the trade
competitiveness of the deficit nation. Thus, the exchange rate responses to these sur-
pluses and deficits should eventually help eliminate—in the medium to long run—the
source of the initial imbalances.
The amount by which exchange rates must adjust to restore current accounts to
balanced positions depends on a number of factors:
■ The initial gap between imports and exports
■ The response of import and export prices to changes in the exchange rate
■ The response of import and export demand to changes in import and export
prices
If a country imports significantly more than it exports, export growth would need
to far outstrip import growth in percentage terms in order to narrow the current
account deficit. A large initial deficit may require a substantial depreciation of the
currency to bring about a meaningful correction of the trade imbalance.
A depreciation of a deficit country’s currency should result in an increase in import
prices in domestic currency terms and a decrease in export prices in foreign currency
terms. However, empirical studies often find limited pass-through effects of exchange
rate changes on traded goods prices. For example, many studies have found that for
every 1% decline in a currency’s value, import prices rise by only 0.5%—and in some
cases by even less—because foreign producers tend to lower their profit margins in an
effort to preserve market share. In light of the limited pass-through of exchange rate
changes into traded goods prices, the exchange rate adjustment required to narrow a
trade imbalance may be far larger than would otherwise be the case.
Many studies have found that the response of import and export demand to
changes in traded goods prices is often quite sluggish, and as a result, relatively long
lags, lasting several years, can occur between (1) the onset of exchange rate changes,
(2) the ultimate adjustment in traded goods prices, and (3) the eventual impact of
those price changes on import demand, export demand, and the underlying current
account imbalance.
The Portfolio Balance Channel
The second mechanism through which current account trends influence exchange rates
is the so-called portfolio balance channel. Current account imbalances shift financial
wealth from deficit nations to surplus nations. Countries with trade deficits will finance
their trade with increased borrowing. This behavior may lead to shifts in global asset
preferences, which in turn could influence the path of exchange rates. For example,


=== PAGE 49 ===


The Impact of Balance of Payments Flows 43
nations running large current account surpluses versus the United States might find
that their holdings of US dollar–denominated assets exceed the amount they desire
to hold in a portfolio context. Actions they might take to reduce their dollar holdings
to desired levels could then have a profound negative impact on the dollar’s value.
The Debt Sustainability Channel
The third mechanism through which current account imbalances can affect exchange
rates is the so-called debt sustainability channel. According to this mechanism, there
should be some upper limit on the ability of countries to run persistently large current
account deficits. If a country runs a large and persistent current account deficit over
time, eventually it will experience an untenable rise in debt owed to foreign investors.
If such investors believe that the deficit country’s external debt is rising to unsustain-
able levels, they are likely to reason that a major depreciation of the deficit country’s
currency will be required at some point to ensure that the current account deficit
narrows significantly and that the external debt stabilizes at a level deemed sustainable.
The existence of persistent current account imbalances will tend to alter the market’s
notion of what exchange rate level represents the true, long-run equilibrium value. For
deficit nations, ever-rising net external debt levels as a percentage of GDP should give
rise to steady (but not necessarily smooth) downward revisions in market expectations
of the currency’s long-run equilibrium value. For surplus countries, ever-rising net
external asset levels as a percentage of GDP should give rise to steady upward revisions
of the currency’s long-run equilibrium value. Hence, one would expect currency values
to move broadly in line with trends in debt and/or asset accumulation.
PERSISTENT CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICITS: THE US CURRENT ACCOUNT
AND THE US DOLLAR
The historical record indicates that the trend in the US current account has been
an important determinant of the long-term swings in the US dollar’s value but
also that there can be rather long lags between the onset of a deterioration in
the current account balance and an eventual decline in the dollar’s value. For
example, the US current account balance deteriorated sharply in the first half
of the 1980s, yet the dollar soared over that period. The reason for the dollar’s
strength over that period was that high US real interest rates attracted large
inflows of capital from abroad, which pushed the dollar higher despite the large
US external imbalance. Eventually, however, concerns regarding the sustainability
of the ever-widening US current account deficit triggered a major dollar decline
in the second half of the 1980s.
History repeated itself in the second half of the 1990s, with the US current
account balance once again deteriorating while the dollar soared over the same
period. This time, the dollar’s strength was driven by strong foreign direct
investment, as well as both debt- and equity-related flows into the United States.
Beginning in 2001, however, the ever-widening US current account deficit, cou-
pled with a decline in US interest rates, made it more difficult for the United
States to attract the foreign private capital needed to finance its current account
deficit. The dollar eventually succumbed to the weight of ever-larger trade and
current account deficits and began a multi-year slide, starting in 2002–2003.
Interestingly, the US dollar has undergone three major downward cycles since
the advent of floating exchange rates: 1977–1978, 1985–1987, and 2002–2008.
In each of those downward cycles, the dollar’s slide was driven in large part by
concerns over outsized US current account deficits coupled with relatively low
nominal and/or real short-term US interest rates, which made it difficult to
attract sufficient foreign capital to the United States to finance those deficits.


=== PAGE 50 ===


44 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
EXCHANGE RATE ADJUSTMENT IN SURPLUS NATIONS: JAPAN AND CHINA
Japan and, for a number of years, China represent examples of countries with
large current account surpluses and illustrate the pressure that those surpluses
can bring to bear on currencies. In the case of Japan, its rising current account
surplus has exerted persistent upward pressure on the yen’s value versus the
dollar over time. Part of this upward pressure simply reflected the increase in
demand for yen to pay for Japan’s merchandise exports. But some of the upward
pressure on the yen might also have stemmed from rising commercial tensions
between the United States and Japan.
Protectionist sentiment in the United States rose steadily with the rising bilat-
eral trade deficit that the United States ran with Japan in the postwar period. US
policymakers contended that the yen was undervalued and needed to appreciate.
With the increasing trade imbalance between the two countries contributing
to more heated protectionist rhetoric, Japan felt compelled to tolerate steady
upward pressure on the yen. As a result, the yen’s value versus the dollar has
tended to move in sync with the trend in Japan’s current account surplus.
12 CAPITAL FLOWS
explain how flows in the balance of payment accounts affect
currency exchange rates
Greater financial integration of the world’s capital markets and greater freedom of
capital to flow across national borders have increased the importance of global financial
flows in determining exchange rates, interest rates, and broad asset price trends. One
can cite many examples in which global financial flows either caused or contributed
to extremes in exchange rates, interest rates, or asset prices.
In numerous cases, global capital flows have helped fuel boom-like conditions
in emerging market economies for a while before, suddenly and often without ade-
quate warning, those flows reversed. The reversals often caused a major economic
downturn, sovereign default, a serious banking crisis, and/or significant currency
depreciation. Excessive emerging market capital inflows often plant the seeds of a
crisis by contributing to:
1. an unwarranted appreciation of the emerging market currency,
2. a huge buildup in external indebtedness,
3. an asset bubble,
4. a consumption binge that contributes to explosive growth in domestic credit
and/or the current account deficit, or
5. an overinvestment in risky projects and questionable activities.
Governments in emerging markets often resist currency appreciation from excessive
capital inflows by using capital controls or selling their currency in the FX market. An
example of capital controls is the Brazilian government 2016 tax on foreign exchange
transactions to control capital flows and raise government revenue. In general, gov-
ernment control of the exchange rate will not be completely effective because even if


=== PAGE 51 ===


Capital Flows 45
a government prohibits investment capital flows, some capital flows will be needed
for international trade. In addition, the existence or emergence of black markets for
the country’s currency will inhibit the ability of the government to fully control the
exchange rates for its own currency.
Sometimes, capital flows due to interest rate spreads have little impact on the
trend in exchange rates. Consider the case of the Turkish lira. The lira attracted a
lot of interest on the part of global fund managers over the 2002–10 period, in large
part because of its attractive yields. Turkish–US short-term yield spreads averaged
over 1,000 bps during much of this period. As capital flowed into Turkey, the Turkish
authorities intervened in the foreign exchange market in an attempt to keep the lira
from appreciating. The result was that international investors were not able to reap
the anticipated currency gains over this period. While the return from the movement
in the spot exchange rate was fairly small, a long Turkish lira/short US dollar carry
trade position generated significant long-run returns, mostly from the accumulated
yield spread.
One-sided capital flows can persist for long periods. Consider the case of a
high-yield, inflation-prone emerging market country that wants to promote price
stability and long-term sustainable growth. To achieve price stability, policymakers
in the high-yield economy will initiate a tightening in monetary policy by gradually
raising the level of domestic interest rates relative to yield levels in the rest of the world.
If the tightening in domestic monetary policy is sustained, inflation expectations for
the high-yield economy relative to other economies should gradually decline. The
combination of sustained wide nominal yield spreads and a steady narrowing in rela-
tive inflation expectations should exert upward pressure on the high-yield currency’s
value, resulting in carry trade profits over long periods.
Policymakers in high-yield markets can also pursue policies which attract foreign
investment; such policies might include tighter fiscal policies, liberalization of financial
markets, fewer capital flow restrictions, privatization, and/or a better business envi-
ronment. Such policies should encourage investors to gradually require a lower risk
premium to hold the high-yield currency’s assets and revise upward their assessment
of the long-run equilibrium value of that country’s currency.
The historical evidence suggests that the impact of nominal interest rate spreads
on the exchange rate tends to be gradual. Monetary policymakers tend to adjust their
official lending rates slowly over time—in part because of the uncertainty that policy-
makers face and in part because the authorities do not want to disrupt the financial
markets. This very gradual change in rates implies a very gradual narrowing of the
spread between high-yield and low-yield countries. Similarly, the downward trends
in inflation expectations and risk premiums in the higher-yield market also tend to
unfold gradually. It often takes several years to determine whether structural economic
changes will take root and boost the long-run competitiveness of the higher-yield
country. Because these fundamental drivers tend to reinforce each other over time,
there may be persistence in capital flows and carry trade returns.
Equity Market Trends and Exchange Rates
Increasing equity prices can also attract foreign capital. Although exchange rates and
equity market returns sometimes exhibit positive correlation, the relationship between
equity market performance and exchange rates is not stable. The long-run correlation
between the US equity market and the dollar, for example, is very close to zero, but
over short to medium periods, correlations tend to swing from being highly positive
to being highly negative, depending on market conditions. For instance, between 1990
and 1995, the US dollar fell while the US equity market was strong and the Japanese
yen soared while Japanese stocks were weak. In contrast, between 1995 and early
2000, the US dollar soared in tandem with a rising US equity market while the yen


=== PAGE 52 ===


46 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
weakened in tandem with a decline in the Japanese equity market. Such instability in
the correlation between exchange rates and equity markets makes it difficult to form
judgments on possible future currency moves based solely on expected equity market
performance.
Since the global financial crisis, there has been a decidedly negative correlation
between the US dollar and the US equity market. Market observers attribute this
behavior of the US dollar to its role as a safe haven asset. When investors’ appetite
for risk is high—that is, when the market is in “risk-on” mode—investor demand for
risky assets, such as equities, tends to rise, which drives up their prices. At the same
time, investor demand for safe haven assets, such as the dollar, tends to decline, which
drives their values lower. The opposite has occurred when the market has been in
“risk-off” mode.
EXAMPLE 8
Capital Flows and Exchange Rates
Monique Kwan, a currency strategist at a major foreign exchange dealer, is
responsible for formulating trading strategies for the currencies of both devel-
oped market (DM) and emerging market (EM) countries. She examines two
countries—one DM and one EM—and notes that the DM country has what
is considered a low-yield safe haven currency while the EM country has a
high-yield currency whose value is more exposed to fluctuations in the global
economic growth rate. Kwan is trying to form an opinion about movements in
the exchange rate for the EM currency.
1. All else equal, the exchange rate for the EM currency will most likely depre-
ciate if the:
A. long-run equilibrium value of the high-yield currency is revised
upward.
B. nominal yield spread between the EM and DM countries increases
over time.
C. expected inflation differential between the EM and DM countries is
revised upward.
Solution
C is correct. All else equal, an increase in the expected inflation differential
should lead to depreciation of the EM currency.
2. An increase in safe haven demand would most likely:
A. increase the risk premium demanded by international investors to
hold assets denominated in the EM currency.
B. raise the return earned on carry trade strategies.
C. exert upward pressure on the value of the EM currency.
Solution
A is correct. During times of intense risk aversion, investors will crowd into
the safe haven currency. This tendency implies an increased risk premium
demanded by investors to hold the EM currency.
3. Kwan notes that the DM country is running a persistent current account
deficit with the EM country. To isolate the influence of this chronic im-
balance on exchange rates, she focuses only on the bilateral relationship
between the EM and DM countries and makes the simplifying assumption


=== PAGE 53 ===


Capital Flows 47
that the external accounts of these two countries are otherwise balanced
(i.e., there are no other current account deficits).
Over time and all else equal, the persistent current account deficit with the
EM country would most likely lead to:
A. a large buildup of the EM country’s assets held by the DM country.
B. an increase in the trade competitiveness of the EM country.
C. an upward revision in the long-run equilibrium EM currency value.
Solution
C is correct. Over time, the DM country will see its level of external debt
rise as a result of the chronic current account imbalance. Eventually, this
trend should lead to a downward revision of the DM currency’s long-run
equilibrium level (via the debt sustainability channel). This is equivalent
to an increase in the EM currency’s long-run exchange rate. A is incorrect
because the DM country’s current account deficit is likely to lead to a build-
up in DM country assets held by the EM country. B is incorrect because,
at some point, the currency strength should contribute to deterioration in
the trade competitiveness of the country with the trade surplus (the EM
country).
4. Kwan notes that because of the high yield on the EM country’s bonds,
international investors have recently been reallocating their portfolios more
heavily toward this country’s assets. As a result of these capital inflows, the
EM country has been experiencing boom-like conditions.
Given the current boom-like conditions in the EM economy, in the near
term, these capital inflows are most likely to lead to:
A. a decrease in inflation expectations in the EM.
B. an increase in the risk premium for the EM.
C. an increase in the EM currency value.
Solution
C is correct. Given the current investor enthusiasm for the EM country’s
assets and the boom-like conditions in the country, it is most likely that in
the near term, the EM currency will appreciate. At the same time, expected
inflation in the EM country is also likely increasing and—given the enthusi-
asm for EM assets—the risk premium is likely decreasing.
5. If these capital inflows led to an unwanted appreciation in the real value of
its currency, the EM country’s government would most likely:
A. impose capital controls.
B. decrease taxes on consumption and investment.
C. buy its currency in the foreign exchange market.
Solution
A is correct. To reduce unwanted appreciation of its currency, the EM coun-
try would be most likely to impose capital controls to counteract the surging
capital inflows. Because these inflows are often associated with overinvest-
ment and consumption, the EM government would not be likely to encour-
age these activities through lower taxes. Nor would the EM country be likely
to encourage further currency appreciation by intervening in the market to
buy its own currency.


=== PAGE 54 ===


48 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
6. If government actions were ineffective and the EM country’s bubble eventu-
ally burst, this would most likely be reflected in an increase in:
A. the risk premium for the EM.
B. the EM currency value.
C. the long-run equilibrium EM currency value.
Solution
A is correct. Episodes of surging capital flows into EM countries have often
ended badly (with a rapid reversal of these inflows as the bubble bursts).
This is most likely to be reflected in an increase in the EM risk premium. It
is much less likely that a bursting bubble would be reflected in an increase in
either the EM currency value or its long-term equilibrium value.
7. Finally, Kwan turns to examining the link between the value of the DM
country’s currency and movements in the DM country’s main stock market
index. One of her research associates tells her that, in general, the correla-
tion between equity market returns and changes in exchange rates has been
found to be highly positive over time.
The statement made by the research associate is:
A. correct.
B. incorrect, because the correlation is highly negative over time.
C. incorrect, because the correlation is not stable and tends to converge
toward zero in the long run.
Solution
C is correct. Correlations between equity returns and exchange rates are
unstable in the short term and tend toward zero in the long run.
13 MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES
explain the potential effects of monetary and fiscal policy on
exchange rates
As the foregoing discussion indicates, government policies can have a significant
impact on exchange rate movements. We now examine the channels through which
government monetary and fiscal policies are transmitted.
The Mundell–Fleming Model
The Mundell–Fleming model describes how changes in monetary and fiscal policy
within a country affect interest rates and economic activity, which in turn leads to
changes in capital flows and trade and ultimately to changes in the exchange rate. The
model focuses only on aggregate demand and assumes there is sufficient slack in the
economy to allow increases in output without price level increases.
In this model, expansionary monetary policy affects growth, in part, by reducing
interest rates and thereby increasing investment and consumption spending. Given
flexible exchange rates and expansionary monetary policy, downward pressure on


=== PAGE 55 ===


Monetary and Fiscal Policies 49
domestic interest rates will induce capital to flow to higher-yielding markets, putting
downward pressure on the domestic currency. The more responsive capital flows are
to interest rate differentials, the greater the depreciation of the currency.
Expansionary fiscal policy—either directly through increased spending or indirectly
via lower taxes—typically exerts upward pressure on interest rates because larger
budget deficits must be financed. With flexible exchange rates and mobile capital,
the rising domestic interest rates will attract capital from lower-yielding markets,
putting upward pressure on the domestic currency. If capital flows are highly sensitive
to interest rate differentials, then the domestic currency will tend to appreciate sub-
stantially. If, however, capital flows are immobile and very insensitive to interest rate
differentials, the policy-induced increase in aggregate demand will increase imports
and worsen the trade balance, creating downward pressure on the currency with no
offsetting capital inflows to provide support for the currency.
The specific mix of monetary and fiscal policies in a country can have a profound
effect on its exchange rate. Consider first the case of high capital mobility. With floating
exchange rates and high capital mobility, a domestic currency will appreciate given a
restrictive domestic monetary policy and/or an expansionary fiscal policy that results
in higher real interest rates. Similarly, a domestic currency will depreciate given an
expansionary domestic monetary policy and/or a restrictive fiscal policy that results
in lower real interest rates. In Exhibit 4, we show that the combination of a restrictive
monetary policy and an expansionary fiscal policy (higher real rates) is extremely
bullish for a currency when capital mobility is high; likewise, the combination of
an expansionary monetary policy and a restrictive fiscal policy (lower real rates) is
bearish for a currency. The effect on the currency of monetary and fiscal policies that
are both expansionary or both restrictive is indeterminate under conditions of high
capital mobility.
Exhibit 4: Monetary–Fiscal Policy Mix and the Determination of Exchange
Rates under Conditions of High Capital Mobility
DEM/USD US Less German Real Interest Rates (bps)
1.9 200
1.8 Differential (right axis)
100
1.7
0
1.6
Exchange Rate
(left axis) –100
1.5
–200
1.4
1.3 –300
93 94 95 96 97 98
Source: Rosenberg (1996, p. 132).
When capital mobility is low, the effects of monetary and fiscal policy on exchange
rates will operate primarily through trade flows rather than capital flows. The com-
bination of expansionary monetary and fiscal policy will be bearish for a currency.


=== PAGE 56 ===


50 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Earlier we said that expansionary fiscal policy will increase imports and hence the
trade deficit, creating downward pressure on the currency. Layering on an expansive
monetary policy will further boost spending and imports, worsening the trade balance
and exacerbating the downward pressure on the currency.
The combination of restrictive monetary and fiscal policy will be bullish for a
currency. This policy mix will tend to reduce imports, leading to an improvement in
the trade balance.
The impact of expansionary monetary and restrictive fiscal policies (or restric-
tive monetary and expansionary fiscal policies) on aggregate demand and the trade
balance, and hence on the exchange rate, is indeterminate under conditions of low
capital mobility. Exhibit 5 summarizes these results.
Exhibit 5: Monetary–Fiscal Policy Mix and the Determination of Exchange
Rates under Conditions of Low Capital Mobility
Expansionary Restrictive
Monetary Monetary
Policy Policy
Domestic
Expansionary
currency Indeterminate
Fiscal Policy
depreciates
Domestic
Restrictive Indeterminate
currency
Fiscal Policy
appreciates
Source: Adapted from Rosenberg (1996, p. 133).
Exhibit 4 is more relevant for the G–10 countries because capital mobility tends to
be high in developed economies. Exhibit 5 is more relevant for emerging market
economies that restrict capital movement.
A classic case in which a dramatic shift in the policy mix caused dramatic changes
in exchange rates was that of Germany in 1990–1992. During that period, the German
government pursued a highly expansionary fiscal policy to help facilitate German
unification. At the same time, the Bundesbank pursued an extraordinarily restrictive
monetary policy to combat the inflationary pressures associated with unification. The
expansive fiscal/restrictive monetary policy mix drove German interest rates sharply
higher, eventually causing the German currency to appreciate.
Monetary Models of Exchange Rate Determination
In the Mundell–Fleming model, monetary policy is transmitted to the exchange rate
through its impact on interest rates and output. Changes in the price level and/or the
inflation rate play no role. Monetary models of exchange rate determination generally
take the opposite perspective: Output is fixed and monetary policy affects exchange
rates primarily through the price level and the rate of inflation. In this section, we briefly
describe two variations of the monetary approach to exchange rate determination.


=== PAGE 57 ===


Monetary and Fiscal Policies 51
The monetary approach asserts that an X percent rise in the domestic money
supply will produce an X percent rise in the domestic price level. Assuming that pur-
chasing power parity holds—that is, that changes in exchange rates reflect changes
in relative inflation rates—a money supply–induced increase (decrease) in domestic
prices relative to foreign prices should lead to a proportional decrease (increase) in
the domestic currency’s value.
One of the major shortcomings of the pure monetary approach is the assumption
that purchasing power parity holds in both the short and long runs. Because purchas-
ing power parity rarely holds in either the short or medium run, the pure monetary
model may not provide a realistic explanation of the impact of monetary forces on
the exchange rate.
To rectify that problem, Dornbusch (1976) constructed a modified monetary model
that assumes prices have limited flexibility in the short run but are fully flexible in the
long run. The long-run flexibility of the price level ensures that any increase in the
domestic money supply will give rise to a proportional increase in domestic prices
and thus contribute to a depreciation of the domestic currency in the long run, which
is consistent with the pure monetary model. If the domestic price level is assumed
to be inflexible in the short run, however, the model implies that the exchange rate is
likely to overshoot its long-run PPP path in the short run. With inflexible domestic
prices in the short run, any increase in the nominal money supply results in a decline
in the domestic interest rate. Assuming that capital is highly mobile, the decline in
domestic interest rates will precipitate a capital outflow, which in the short run will
cause the domestic currency to depreciate below its new long-run equilibrium level.
In the long run, once domestic nominal interest rates rise, the currency will appreciate
and move into line with the path predicted by the conventional monetary approach.
Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates: The Historical
Evidence
Historically, changes in monetary policy have had a profound impact on exchange
rates. In the case of the US dollar, the Federal Reserve’s policy of quantitative
easing after the global financial crisis resulted in dollar depreciation from mid-
2009 to 2011. The subsequent ending of quantitative easing in 2014, along with
the anticipation that the United States would raise interest rates before many
other countries, played a key role in driving the dollar higher.
Beginning in 2013, Abenomics—fiscal stimulus, monetary easing, and struc-
tural reforms—and the use of quantitative easing in Japan led to a steady decline
in interest rates and eventually to negative interest rates in 2016. From 2013 to
2015, the value of the yen changed from roughly JPY 90/USD to JPY 120/USD.
Likewise, the use of quantitative easing by the European Central Bank in 2015
led to declines in the value of the euro.
Excessively expansionary monetary policies by central banks in emerging
markets have often planted the seeds of speculative attacks on their currencies.
In the early 1980s, exchange rate crises in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico
were all preceded by sharp accelerations in domestic credit expansions. In 2012,
Venezuela began a period of triple-digit inflation, followed by a massive currency
depreciation and an economic crisis.


=== PAGE 58 ===


52 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
EXAMPLE 9
Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates
Monique Kwan, the currency strategist at a major foreign exchange dealer, is
preparing a report on the outlook for several currencies that she follows. She
begins by considering the outlook for the currency of a developed market country
with high capital mobility across its borders and a flexible exchange rate. This
DM country also has low levels of public and private debt.
Given these conditions, Kwan tries to assess the impact of each of the fol-
lowing policy changes.
1. For the DM currency, increasing the degree of monetary easing (reducing
interest rates and increasing money supply) will most likely:
A. cause the currency to appreciate.
B. cause the currency to depreciate.
C. have an indeterminate effect on the currency.
Solution
B is correct. A decrease in the policy rate would most likely cause capi-
tal to re-allocate to higher-yielding markets. This would lead to currency
depreciation.
2. The pursuit of an expansionary domestic fiscal policy by the DM country
will, in the short run, most likely:
A. cause the domestic currency’s value to appreciate.
B. cause the domestic currency’s value to depreciate.
C. have an indeterminate effect on the domestic currency’s value.
Solution
A is correct. An expansionary fiscal policy will lead to higher levels of
government debt and interest rates, which will attract international capital
flows. (In the long run, however, an excessive buildup in debt may eventually
cause downward pressure on the domestic currency.)
3. Next, Kwan turns her attention to an emerging market country that has low
levels of public and private debt. Currently, the EM country has a fixed ex-
change rate but no controls over international capital mobility. However, the
country is considering replacing its fixed exchange rate policy with a policy
based on capital controls. These proposed controls are meant to reduce
international capital mobility by limiting short-term investment flows (“hot
money”) in and out of its domestic capital markets.
To maintain the exchange rate peg while increasing the degree of monetary
easing, the EM country will most likely have to:
A. tighten fiscal policy.
B. decrease interest rates.
C. buy its own currency in the FX market.
Solution
C is correct. The looser monetary policy will lead to exchange rate deprecia-
tion. To counter this effect and maintain the currency peg, the central bank
will have to intervene in the FX market, buying the country’s own currency.


=== PAGE 59 ===


Monetary and Fiscal Policies 53
A is incorrect because tighter fiscal policy is associated with lower interest
rates and is therefore likely to increase rather than mitigate the downward
pressure on the domestic currency. Similarly, B is incorrect because a move
to lower interest rates would exacerbate the downward pressure on the cur-
rency and hence the pressure on the peg.
4. After the EM country replaces its currency peg with capital controls, would
its exchange rate be unaffected by a tightening in monetary policy?
A. Yes.
B. No, the domestic currency would appreciate.
C. No, the domestic currency would depreciate.
Solution
B is correct. In general, capital controls will not completely eliminate capital
flows but will limit their magnitude and responsiveness to investment incen-
tives such as interest rate differentials. At a minimum, flows directly related
to financing international trade will typically be allowed. The exchange rate
will still respond to monetary policy. With limited capital mobility, however,
monetary policy’s main influence is likely to come through the impact on
aggregate demand and the trade balance. A tighter domestic monetary pol-
icy will most likely lead to higher interest rates and less domestic demand,
including less demand for imported goods. With fewer imports and with ex-
ports held constant, there will be modest upward pressure on the currency.
5. After the EM country replaces its currency peg with capital controls, the
simultaneous pursuit of a tight monetary policy and a highly expansionary
fiscal policy by the EM country will most likely:
A. cause the currency to appreciate.
B. cause the currency to depreciate.
C. have an indeterminate effect on the currency.
Solution
C is correct because (1) capital mobility is low, so the induced increase in
interest rates is likely to exert only weak upward pressure on the currency;
(2) the combined impact on aggregate demand is indeterminate; and (3) if
aggregate demand increases, the downward pressure on the currency due to
a worsening trade balance may or may not fully offset the upward pressure
exerted by capital flows.
The Portfolio Balance Approach
In this section, we re-examine the role fiscal policy plays in determining exchange
rates. The Mundell–Fleming model is essentially a short-run model of exchange rate
determination. It makes no allowance for the long-term effects of budgetary imbal-
ances that typically arise from sustained fiscal policy actions. The portfolio balance
approach to exchange rate determination remedies this limitation. In our previous
discussion of the portfolio balance channel, we stated that the currencies of countries
with trade deficits will decline over time. We expand that discussion here to more
closely examine how exchange rates change over the long term.
In the portfolio balance approach, global investors are assumed to hold a diver-
sified portfolio of domestic and foreign assets, including bonds. The desired allocation
is assumed to vary in response to changes in expected return and risk considerations.


=== PAGE 60 ===


54 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
In this framework, a growing government budget deficit leads to a steady increase
in the supply of domestic bonds outstanding. These bonds will be willingly held only
if investors are compensated in the form of a higher expected return. Such a return
could come from (1) higher interest rates and/or a higher risk premium, (2) immediate
depreciation of the currency to a level sufficient to generate anticipation of gains from
subsequent currency appreciation, or (3) some combination of these two factors. The
currency adjustments required in the second mechanism are the core of the portfolio
balance approach.
One of the major insights one should draw from the portfolio balance model is
that in the long run, governments that run large budget deficits on a sustained basis
could eventually see their currencies decline in value.
The Mundell–Fleming and portfolio balance models can be combined into a single
integrated framework in which expansionary fiscal policy under conditions of high
capital mobility may be positive for a currency in the short run but negative in the
long run. Exhibit 6 illustrates this concept. A domestic currency may rise in value
when the expansionary fiscal policy is first put into place. As deficits mount over time
and the government’s debt obligations rise, however, market participants will begin
to wonder how that debt will be financed. If the volume of debt rises to levels that are
believed to be unsustainable, market participants may believe that the central bank
will eventually be pressured to “monetize” the debt—that is, to buy the government’s
debt with newly created money. Such a scenario would clearly lead to a rapid reversal
of the initial currency appreciation. Alternatively, the market may believe that the
government will eventually have to shift toward significant restraint to implement a
more restrictive, sustainable fiscal policy over the longer term.
Exhibit 6: The Short- and Long-Run Response of Exchange Rates to Changes
in Fiscal Policy
Expansionary Restrictive
Monetary Monetary
Policy Policy
Domestic
Expansionary
currency Indeterminate
Fiscal Policy
depreciates
Domestic
Restrictive
Indeterminate currency
Fiscal Policy
appreciates
Source: Rosenberg (2003).
EXAMPLE 10
Fiscal Policy and Exchange Rates
Monique Kwan is continuing her analysis of the foreign exchange rate outlook
for selected countries. She examines a DM country that has a high degree of
capital mobility and a floating-rate currency regime. Kwan notices that although


=== PAGE 61 ===


Monetary and Fiscal Policies 55
the current outstanding volume of government debt is low, as a percentage of
GDP, it is rising sharply as a result of expansionary fiscal policy. Moreover,
projections for the government debt-to-GDP ratio point to further increases
well into the future.
Kwan uses the Mundell–Fleming and portfolio balance models to form an
opinion about both the short-run and long-run implications for the DM coun-
try’s exchange rate.
1. Over the short run, Kwan is most likely to expect:
A. appreciation of the DM’s currency.
B. an increase in the DM’s asset prices.
C. a decrease in the DM’s risk premium.
Solution
A is correct. The DM country currently has a low debt load (as a percent-
age of GDP), and in the short run, its expansionary fiscal policy will lead to
higher interest rates and higher real rates relative to other countries. This
path should lead to currency appreciation. The higher domestic interest
rates will (all else equal) depress local asset prices (so B is incorrect), and the
rising debt load is likely to increase rather than decrease the risk premium
(so C is incorrect).
2. Over the medium term, as the DM country’s government debt becomes
harder to finance, Kwan would be most likely to expect that:
A. fiscal policy will turn more accommodative.
B. the mark-to-market value of the debt will increase.
C. monetary policy will become more accommodative.
Solution
C is correct. As government debt becomes harder to finance, the govern-
ment will be tempted to monetize the debt through an accommodative
monetary policy. A is incorrect because an inability to finance the debt will
make it hard for fiscal policy to become more accommodative. B is incorrect
because as investors demand a higher risk premium (a higher return) for
holding the DM country’s debt, the mark-to-market value of the debt will
decline (i.e., bond prices will decrease and bond yields will increase).
3. Assuming that the DM country’s government debt becomes harder to
finance and there is no change in monetary policy, Kwan is most likely to
expect that over the longer term, there will be a fiscal policy response that
will lead to:
A. currency appreciation as yields rise.
B. currency depreciation as yields decline.
C. an indeterminate impact on the currency, depending on which effect
prevails.
Solution
B is correct. As the DM country’s debt ratio deteriorates, foreign investors
will demand a higher rate of return to compensate them for the increased
risk. Assuming that the central bank will not accommodate (monetize) the
rising government debt, the most likely fiscal response is an eventual move
toward fiscal consolidation—reducing the public deficit and debt levels that
were causing the debt metrics to deteriorate. This policy adjustment would


=== PAGE 62 ===


56 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
involve issuing fewer government bonds. All else equal, bond yields would
decrease, leading to a weaker domestic currency over the longer term.
A is incorrect because currency appreciation is not likely to accompany
rising yields when the government is having difficulty financing its deficit.
There would be a rising risk premium (a deteriorating investor appetite) for
holding DM assets, and hence a currency appreciation would be unlikely de-
spite high DM yields. To avoid paying these high yields on its debt, the DM
government would eventually have to take measures to reduce its deficit
spending. This approach would eventually help reduce investor risk aversion
and DM yields. C is incorrect because given the deterioration in the DM’s
debt metrics, a depreciation of its exchange rate is likely to be an important
part of the restoration of financial market equilibrium.
14 EXCHANGE RATE MANAGEMENT: INTERVENTION
AND CONTROLS
describe objectives of central bank or government intervention and
capital controls and describe the effectiveness of intervention and
capital controls
Capital flows can be both a blessing and a curse. Capital inflows can be a blessing when
they increase domestic investment, thereby increasing a country’s economic growth
and asset values. Currency appreciation often follows, which increases returns to global
investors. Capital inflows can be a curse, however, if they fuel boom-like conditions,
asset price bubbles, and overvaluation of a country’s currency. If capital inflows then
reverse, the result may be a major economic downturn, a significant decline in asset
prices, and a large depreciation of the currency. Capital inflows often are driven by
a combination of “pull” and “push” factors. Pull factors represent a favorable set of
developments that encourage foreign capital inflows. These factors may stem from
both the public and private sectors. Examples of better economic management by a
government include
■ a decrease in inflation and inflation volatility,
■ more-flexible exchange rate regimes,
■ improved fiscal positions,
■ privatization of state-owned entities,
■ liberalization of financial markets, and
■ lifting of foreign exchange regulations and controls.
Ideally, these changes will facilitate strong economic growth in the private sector,
which will attract further foreign investment. A healthy export sector will generate
improvement in the current account balance and an increase in FX reserves, which can
be used by the government as a buffer against future speculative attacks. The returns
from the currency and assets should increase, increasing the foreign investor’s return.
Push factors driving foreign capital inflows are not determined by the domestic
policies but arise from the primary sources of internationally mobile capital, notably
the investor base in industrial countries. For example, the pursuit of low interest rate
policies in industrial countries since the 2008 financial crisis has encouraged global
investors to seek higher returns abroad.


=== PAGE 63 ===


Exchange Rate Management: Intervention and Controls 57
Another important push factor is the long-run trend in asset allocation by industrial
country investors. For example, many fund managers have traditionally had under-
weight exposures to emerging market assets, but with the weight of emerging market
equities in broad global equity market indexes on the rise (as of 2019 the EM share
of world GDP at current prices is over 40%, up from 17% in the 1960s, according to
the IMF), capital flows to EM countries, in the form of increased allocations to EM
equities, are likely to rise.
Private capital inflows to emerging markets go through significant changes over
time. For example, they rose steadily between 2003 and 2007, posting nearly a six-fold
increase over the period. Both push and pull factors contributed to that surge in cap-
ital flows. Net private capital flows to emerging markets tumbled in 2008 and 2009
as heightened risk aversion during the global financial crisis prompted investors to
unwind some of their EM exposures in favor of US assets. In 2010, capital flows to
emerging markets rose as many EM economies weathered the global financial crisis
better than many industrial economies. In addition, the pursuit of ultra-low interest
rate policies in the United States, the euro area, and Japan encouraged global investors
to invest in higher-yielding EM assets.
However beneficial foreign capital is, policymakers must guard against excessive
capital inflows that could quickly be reversed. Capital flow surges planted the seeds of
three major currency crises in the 1990s—the European Exchange Rate Mechanism
(ERM) crisis in 1992–1993, the Mexican peso crisis in late 1994, and the Asian cur-
rency and financial crisis in 1997–1998. Each crisis episode was preceded by a surge
in capital inflows and a buildup of huge, highly leveraged speculative positions by
local as well as international investors in currencies that eventually came under heavy
speculative attack. In the run-up to the ERM crisis, investors—believing that European
yield convergence would occur as European monetary union approached—took on
highly leveraged long positions in the higher-yielding European currencies financed by
short positions in the lower-yielding European currencies. Likewise, in the run-up to
the Mexican peso crisis, investors and banks were highly leveraged and made exten-
sive use of derivative products in taking on speculative long Mexican peso/short US
dollar positions. And in the run-up to the Asian financial crisis, Asian companies and
banks were highly leveraged as they took on a huge volume of short-term dollar- and
yen-denominated debt to fund local activities. In each case, the sudden unwinding
of those leveraged long speculative positions triggered the attacks on the currencies.
Governments resist excessive inflows and currency bubbles by using capital con-
trols and direct intervention (selling their currency) in the foreign exchange market.
Capital controls can take many forms. In the Asian financial crisis, many countries,
such as Malaysia, prevented their banks from offering currency transactions in which
their currency was sold. As mentioned earlier, Brazil has used a tax to limit currency
transactions. In 2006, Thailand required a one-year, non-interest-bearing deposit of
30% of an investment’s value to reduce new foreign inflows, which had been appre-
ciating the Thai baht. Vietnam has limited the foreign ownership of local financial
institutions. In 2015, Ukraine was removed from the MSCI Frontier Markets equity
index after its central bank prevented foreign investors from repatriating funds from
the sale of Ukrainian stocks. By 2016, Venezuela had instituted capital controls in
the form of four different exchange rates, whereby the rate for selling Venezuelan
bolivars for US dollars depended on what the dollars were used for. As a result, many
Venezuelans used the black market to obtain dollars. Venezuela’s capital controls were
subsequently loosened in 2018 and 2019.
At one time, capital controls were frowned on as a policy tool for curbing undesired
surges in capital inflows. It was generally felt that such controls tended to generate
distortions in global trade and finance and that, in all likelihood, market participants
would eventually find ways to circumvent the controls. Furthermore, many thought
that capital controls imposed by one country could deflect capital flows to other


=== PAGE 64 ===


58 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
countries, which could complicate monetary and exchange rate policies in those
economies. Despite such concerns, the IMF has said that the benefits associated
with capital controls may exceed the associated costs. Given the painful lessons that
EM policymakers have learned from previous episodes of capital flow surges, some
believe that under certain circumstances, capital controls may be needed to prevent
exchange rates from overshooting, asset bubbles from forming, and future financial
conditions from deteriorating.
Although a case can be made for government intervention and capital controls to
limit the potential damage associated with unrestricted inflows of overseas capital, the
key issue for policymakers is whether intervention and capital controls will actually
work in terms of (1) preventing currencies from appreciating too strongly, (2) reducing
the aggregate volume of capital inflows, and (3) enabling monetary authorities to pursue
independent monetary policies without having to worry about whether changes in
policy rates might attract too much capital from overseas. As an example of the last
issue, if a central bank increases interest rates to slow inflation, then capital controls
might prevent foreign capital inflows from subsequently depressing interest rates.
Evidence on the effectiveness of direct government intervention suggests that,
in the case of industrial countries, the volume of intervention is often quite small
relative to the average daily turnover of G–10 currencies in the foreign exchange
market. Hence, most studies have concluded that the effect of intervention in devel-
oped market economies is limited. For most developed market countries, the ratio of
official FX reserves held by the respective central banks to the average daily turnover
of foreign exchange trading in that currency is negligible. Most industrial countries
hold insufficient reserves to significantly affect the supply of and demand for their
currency. Note that if a central bank is intervening in an effort to weaken, rather
than strengthen, its own currency, it could (at least in principle) create and sell an
unlimited amount of its currency and accumulate a correspondingly large quantity of
FX reserves. However, persistent intervention in the FX market can undermine the
efficacy of domestic monetary policy.
The evidence on the effectiveness of government intervention in emerging market
currencies is more mixed. Intervention appears to contribute to lower EM exchange
rate volatility, but no statistically significant relationship has emerged between the
level of EM exchange rates and intervention. Some studies have found, however, that
EM policymakers might have greater success in controlling exchange rates than their
industrial country counterparts because the ratio of EM central bank FX reserve hold-
ings to average daily FX turnover in their domestic currencies is actually quite sizable.
With considerably greater firepower in their reserve arsenals, emerging market central
banks appear to be in a stronger position than their developed market counterparts
to influence the level and path of their exchange rates. What’s more, with emerging
market central banks’ FX reserve holdings expanding at a near-record clip in the past
decade, the effectiveness of intervention may be greater now than in the past.
15 WARNING SIGNS OF A CURRENCY CRISIS
describe warning signs of a currency crisis
If capital inflows come to a sudden stop, the result may be a financial crisis, in which
the economy contracts, asset values plummet, and the currency sharply depreciates.
History is filled with examples of currencies that have come under heavy selling pres-
sure within short windows of time. For example, between August 2008 and February


=== PAGE 65 ===


Warning Signs of a Currency Crisis 59
2009, 23 currencies dropped by 25% or more against the US dollar. These included the
developed market currencies of Australia, Sweden, and the United Kingdom, which
dropped by 35% or more, and the emerging market currencies of Brazil, Russia, and
South Korea, which fell by more than 50%.
Currency crises often occur suddenly, with many investors caught by surprise.
Once a wave of selling begins, investors and borrowers must immediately reposition
their portfolios to avoid excessive capital losses. For example, assume a carry trader
had gone long the Brazilian real and borrowed US dollars. Upon an initial depreciation
of the real, the trader would be inclined to exit the trade by selling reals and buying
dollars. Or consider a Brazilian public or private borrower that had financed in US
dollars. The borrower would also be selling reals to buy dollars in order to cover future
repayment of the dollar debt. Either of these actions will intensify selling pressure on
the depreciated currency. It is this massive liquidation of vulnerable positions, often
reinforced by speculative offshore selling, that is largely responsible for the excessive
exchange rate movements that occur during currency crises.
Because most crisis episodes have not been adequately anticipated, a great deal
of effort has been spent developing early warning systems. One of the problems in
developing an early warning system is that views on the underlying causes of currency
crises differ greatly. One school of thought contends that currency crises tend to be
precipitated by deteriorating economic fundamentals, while a second school contends
that currency crises can occur out of the blue, with little evidence of deteriorating
fundamentals preceding them.
If, according to the first school of thought, deteriorating economic fundamentals
often precede crises and if those economic fundamentals tend to deteriorate steadily
and predictably, then it should be possible to construct an early warning system to
anticipate when a currency might be vulnerable.
The second school of thought argues that, although evidence of deteriorating
economic fundamentals might explain a relatively large number of currency collapses,
there might be cases in which economies with relatively sound fundamentals have their
currencies come under attack. Clearly, these currency crises would be more difficult to
predict. Events that are largely unrelated to domestic economic fundamentals include
sudden adverse shifts in market sentiment that become self-fulfilling prophecies and
contagion from crises in other markets. A crisis may spread to a country when, for
example, the country devalues its currency to keep its exports competitive with those
of another country that devalued.
Recognizing that no single model can correctly anticipate the onset of all crisis
episodes, an early warning system might nevertheless be useful in assisting investors
in structuring and/or hedging their global portfolios. An ideal early warning system
would need to incorporate a number of important features. First, it should have
a strong record of predicting actual crises but also should not issue false alarms.
Second, it should include macroeconomic indicators whose data are available on
a timely basis. If data arrive with a long lag, a crisis could be under way before the
early warning system starts flashing red. Third, because currency crises tend to be
triggered in countries with a number of economic problems, not just one, an ideal
early warning system should be broad based, incorporating a wide range of symptoms
that crisis-prone currencies might exhibit.
Many studies have been conducted to develop an early warning system for currency
crises, typically by constructing a model in which a number of variables constitute the
early warning system. Various definitions of currency crises have been used. Although
the variables and methodologies differ from one study to the next, the following con-
ditions were identified in one or more studies (Babecký, Havránek, Matějů, Rusnák,
Šmídková, and Vašíček 2013 and 2014; Daniels and VanHoose 2018):
1. Prior to a currency crisis, the capital markets have been liberalized to allow
the free flow of capital.


=== PAGE 66 ===


60 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
2. There are large inflows of foreign capital (relative to GDP) in the period
leading up to a crisis, with short-term funding denominated in a foreign
currency being particularly problematic.
3. Currency crises are often preceded by (and often coincide with) banking
crises.
4. Countries with fixed or partially fixed exchange rates are more susceptible
to currency crises than countries with floating exchange rates.
5. Foreign exchange reserves tend to decline precipitously as a crisis
approaches.
6. In the period leading up to a crisis, the currency has risen substantially rela-
tive to its historical mean.
7. The ratio of exports to imports (known as “the terms of trade”) often deteri-
orates before a crisis.
8. Broad money growth and the ratio of M2 (a measure of money supply) to
bank reserves tend to rise prior to a crisis.
9. Inflation tends to be significantly higher in pre-crisis periods compared with
tranquil periods.
These factors are usually interrelated and often feed off one another. For example,
in the case of the first five factors, large inflows of foreign capital occur because the
financial markets have been liberalized and domestic banks have borrowed abroad. If
the borrowing is denominated in a foreign currency and the domestic currency initially
depreciates, the bank may have trouble servicing its debt, especially when the debt
is of shorter maturity. This scenario may cause foreign investors to withdraw capital
and speculators to short the currency, with their actions causing further declines in
the currency. If the government is trying to maintain the currency’s value, it could
increase interest rates to stem capital outflows or defend its currency using direct
intervention. The former action may worsen the banking industry’s condition and
slow down the economy. In the latter approach, the government will have to spend
down its foreign currency reserves to buy its own currency in the foreign exchange
markets. If the government appears unwilling or unable to defend its currency, then
capital outflows and speculative attacks will increase.
The fifth through seventh factors are related because an overvalued currency may
make the country’s exports less competitive. With fewer exports, the country is not
able to earn as much foreign currency. Other interrelationships occur because these
factors often coincide.
Models cannot predict every crisis, and they sometimes generate false alarms.
Nevertheless, an early warning system can be useful in assessing and preparing for
potential negative tail risks. As with any analytical tool, the implementation of an early
warning system requires integration with other analysis and judgment that cannot be
easily quantified or conceptualized.
ICELAND’S CURRENCY CRISIS OF 2008
Iceland, a country with a population of 320,000, had traditionally relied on the
fishing, energy, and aluminum industries for economic growth. That began to
change in 2001, when the banking industry was liberalized. Three banks domi-
nated the Icelandic banking industry: Glitnir, Kaupthing, and Landsbanki. Given
Iceland’s small population, these banks sought growth by offering short-term,
internet-based deposit accounts to foreign investors. These accounts offered
attractive interest rates and were denominated in foreign currencies. In partic-
ular, many of the depositors were British, Dutch, and other European citizens
who held deposit accounts denominated in pounds and euros.


=== PAGE 67 ===


Warning Signs of a Currency Crisis 61
With government guarantees on their deposit accounts, the banking industry
grew rapidly. The largest bank, Kaupthing, experienced asset growth of 30 times
between 2000 and 2008. The three banks increased lending rapidly, with many
of their loans being long term, resulting in a maturity mismatch of assets and
liabilities. The banks’ assets were more than 14 times the country’s GDP, while
foreign debt was five times GDP. The three banks constituted more than 70%
of the national stock market capitalization.
The economy expanded at a real growth rate above 20% annually between
2002 and 2005, and many Icelanders left traditional industries to work in the
banks. Iceland earned the nickname “Nordic Tiger” as per capita GDP approached
USD 70,000 in 2007. The Icelandic krona increased in value against the US dollar
by 40% between 2001 and 2007. By 2007, the unemployment rate was less than
1%. Icelanders went on a shopping spree for consumer goods, in part by using
loans tied to the value of foreign currencies, motivated by lower interest rates
abroad. A 2002 trade surplus turned into a trade deficit in the years 2003–2007.
Iceland’s external debt in 2008 was more than 7 times its GDP and 14 times its
export revenue. Broad-based monetary aggregates grew at a rate of 14%–35%
annually from 2002 to 2007. By the fall of 2008, inflation had reached 14%.
As the global financial crisis unfolded in 2008, interbank lending declined
and Icelandic banks were unable to roll over their short-term debt. Anxious
foreign depositors began withdrawing their funds. In the first half of 2008, the
krona depreciated by more than 40% against the euro. As the Icelandic currency
declined in value, it became more difficult for the banks to meet depositors’
liquidity demands, while at the same time the banks’ depreciating krona-de-
nominated assets could not be used for collateral financing.
The three banks collapsed in 2008. Unfortunately for foreign depositors,
because of the relative size of the banks, the government guaranteed only
domestic deposits. Iceland’s central bank became technically insolvent, as its
EUR 2 billion in assets was dwarfed by Iceland’s debt to foreign banks of EUR
50 billion. Trading in the stock market was suspended in October 2008. When it
reopened several days later, the Icelandic Stock Market Index fell by more than
77% as a result of the elimination of the three banks’ equity value.
The government attempted to peg the krona to the euro in October 2008 but
abandoned the peg one day later. When trading in the currency was resumed
later that month, the currency value fell by more than 60% and trading was
eventually suspended. Iceland increased interest rates to 18% to stem outflows of
krona and imposed capital controls on the selling of krona for foreign currency.
The Icelandic economy contracted, and per capita GDP fell 9.2% in 2009. By
the spring of 2009, unemployment was 9%. The country subsequently required
a bailout from the IMF and its neighbors of USD 4.6 billion.
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis database; Bekaert and Hodrick 2018; Matsangou 2015;
Daniels and VanHoose 2017.
EXAMPLE 11
Currency Crises
Monique Kwan now turns her attention to the likelihood of crises in various
emerging market currencies. She discusses this matter with a research associ-
ate, who tells her that the historical record of currency crises shows that most
of these episodes were not very well anticipated by investors (in terms of their


=== PAGE 68 ===


62 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
positioning), by the bond markets (in terms of yield spreads between countries),
or by major credit rating agencies and economists (in terms of the sovereign
credit ratings and forecasts, respectively).
1. The research associate is most likely:
A. correct.
B. incorrect, because most credit rating agencies and economists typi-
cally change their forecasts prior to a crisis.
C. incorrect, because investor positioning and international yield differ-
entials typically shift prior to a crisis.
Solution
A is correct. Currency crises often catch most market participants and ana-
lysts by surprise.
2. Kwan delves further into the historical record of currency crises. She con-
cludes that even countries with relatively sound economic fundamentals
can fall victim to these crisis episodes and that these attacks can occur when
sentiment shifts for reasons unrelated to economic fundamentals.
Kwan’s conclusion is most likely:
A. correct.
B. incorrect, because there are few historical crises involving currencies
of countries with sound economic fundamentals.
C. incorrect, because there are few historical episodes in which a sudden
adverse shift in market sentiment occurs that is unrelated to economic
fundamentals.
Solution
A is correct. Even countries with sound economic fundamentals can be sub-
ject to a currency crisis, including instances when market sentiment shifts
for non-economic reasons.
3. To better advise the firm’s clients on the likelihood of currency crises, Kwan
tries to formulate an early warning system for these episodes. She recogniz-
es that a typical currency crisis tends to be triggered by a number of eco-
nomic problems, not just one.
Kwan’s early warning system is least likely to indicate an impending crisis
when there is:
A. an expansionary monetary policy.
B. an overly appreciated exchange rate.
C. a rising level of foreign exchange reserves at the central bank.
Solution
C is correct. A high level of foreign exchange reserves held by a country
typically decreases the likelihood of a currency crisis.
4. Kwan’s early warning system would most likely be better if it:
A. had a strong record of predicting actual crises, even if it generates a lot
of false signals.


=== PAGE 69 ===


Warning Signs of a Currency Crisis 63
B. included a wide variety of economic indicators, including those for
which data are available only with a significant lag.
C. started flashing well in advance of an actual currency crisis to give
market participants time to adjust or hedge their portfolios before the
crisis hits.
Solution
C is correct. Early warnings are a positive factor in judging the effectiveness
of the system, whereas false signals and the use of lagged data would be
considered negative factors.
SUMMARY
Exchange rates are among the most difficult financial market prices to understand and
therefore to value. There is no simple, robust framework that investors can rely on in
assessing the appropriate level and likely movements of exchange rates.
Most economists believe that there is an equilibrium level or a path to that equilib-
rium value that a currency will gravitate toward in the long run. Although short- and
medium-term cyclical deviations from the long-run equilibrium path can be sizable
and persistent, fundamental forces should eventually drive the currency back toward
its long-run equilibrium path. Evidence suggests that misalignments tend to build up
gradually over time. As these misalignments build, they are likely to generate serious
economic imbalances that will eventually lead to correction of the underlying exchange
rate misalignment.
We have described how changes in monetary policy, fiscal policy, current account
trends, and capital flows affect exchange rate trends, as well as what role government
intervention and capital controls can play in counteracting potentially undesirable
exchange rate movements. We have made the following key points:
■ Spot exchange rates apply to trades for the next settlement date (usually T
+ 2) for a given currency pair. Forward exchange rates apply to trades to be
settled at any longer maturity.
■ Market makers quote bid and offer prices (in terms of the price currency) at
which they will buy or sell the base currency.
● The offer price is always higher than the bid price.
● The counterparty that asks for a two-sided price quote has the option
(but not the obligation) to deal at either the bid or offer price quoted.
● The bid–offer spread depends on (1) the currency pair involved, (2) the
time of day, (3) market volatility, (4) the transaction size, and (5) the rela-
tionship between the dealer and the client. Spreads are tightest in highly
liquid currency pairs, when the key market centers are open, and when
market volatility is relatively low.
■ Absence of arbitrage requires the following:
● The bid (offer) shown by a dealer in the interbank market cannot be
higher (lower) than the current interbank offer (bid) price.
● The cross-rate bids (offers) posted by a dealer must be lower (higher)
than the implied cross-rate offers (bids) available in the interbank mar-
ket. If they are not, then a triangular arbitrage opportunity arises.


=== PAGE 70 ===


64 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
■ Forward exchange rates are quoted in terms of points to be added to the
spot exchange rate. If the points are positive (negative), the base currency
is trading at a forward premium (discount). The points are proportional to
the interest rate differential and approximately proportional to the time to
maturity.
■ International parity conditions show us how expected inflation, interest rate
differentials, forward exchange rates, and expected future spot exchange
rates are linked. In an ideal world,
● relative expected inflation rates should determine relative nominal inter-
est rates,
● relative interest rates should determine forward exchange rates, and
● forward exchange rates should correctly anticipate the path of the future
spot exchange rate.
■ International parity conditions tell us that countries with high (low)
expected inflation rates should see their currencies depreciate (appreciate)
over time, that high-yield currencies should depreciate relative to low-yield
currencies over time, and that forward exchange rates should function as
unbiased predictors of future spot exchange rates.
■ With the exception of covered interest rate parity, which is enforced by arbi-
trage, the key international parity conditions rarely hold in either the short
or medium term. However, the parity conditions tend to hold over relatively
long horizons.
■ According to the theory of covered interest rate parity, a
foreign-currency-denominated money market investment that is com-
pletely hedged against exchange rate risk in the forward market should yield
exactly the same return as an otherwise identical domestic money market
investment.
■ According to the theory of uncovered interest rate parity, the expected
change in a domestic currency’s value should be fully reflected
in domestic–foreign interest rate spreads. Hence, an unhedged
foreign-currency-denominated money market investment is expected to
yield the same return as an otherwise identical domestic money market
investment.
■ According to the ex ante purchasing power parity condition, expected
changes in exchange rates should equal the difference in expected national
inflation rates.
■ If both ex ante purchasing power parity and uncovered interest rate parity
held, real interest rates across all markets would be the same. This result is
real interest rate parity.
■ The international Fisher effect says that the nominal interest rate differential
between two currencies equals the difference between the expected inflation
rates. The international Fisher effect assumes that risk premiums are the
same throughout the world.
■ If both covered and uncovered interest rate parity held, then forward rate
parity would hold and the market would set the forward exchange rate equal
to the expected spot exchange rate: The forward exchange rate would serve
as an unbiased predictor of the future spot exchange rate.
■ Most studies have found that high-yield currencies do not depreciate and
low-yield currencies do not appreciate as much as yield spreads would sug-
gest over short to medium periods, thus violating the theory of uncovered
interest rate parity.


=== PAGE 71 ===


Warning Signs of a Currency Crisis 65
■ Carry trades overweight high-yield currencies at the expense of low-yield
currencies. Historically, carry trades have generated attractive returns in
benign market conditions but tend to perform poorly (i.e., are subject to
crash risk) when market conditions are highly volatile.
■ According to a balance of payments approach, countries that run persistent
current account deficits will generally see their currencies weaken over time.
Similarly, countries that run persistent current account surpluses will tend
to see their currencies appreciate over time.
■ Large current account imbalances can persist for long periods of time before
they trigger an adjustment in exchange rates.
■ Greater financial integration of the world’s capital markets and greater free-
dom of capital to flow across national borders have increased the impor-
tance of global capital flows in determining exchange rates.
■ Countries that institute relatively tight monetary policies, introduce struc-
tural economic reforms, and lower budget deficits will often see their cur-
rencies strengthen over time as capital flows respond positively to relatively
high nominal interest rates, lower inflation expectations, a lower risk pre-
mium, and an upward revision in the market’s assessment of what exchange
rate level constitutes long-run fair value.
■ Monetary policy affects the exchange rate through a variety of channels. In
the Mundell–Fleming model, it does so primarily through the interest rate
sensitivity of capital flows, strengthening the currency when monetary pol-
icy is tightened and weakening it when monetary policy is eased. The more
sensitive capital flows are to the change in interest rates, the greater the
exchange rate’s responsiveness to the change in monetary policy.
■ In the monetary model of exchange rate determination, monetary policy is
deemed to have a direct impact on the actual and expected path of inflation,
which, via purchasing power parity, translates into a corresponding impact
on the exchange rate.
■ Countries that pursue overly easy monetary policies will see their currencies
depreciate over time.
■ In the Mundell–Fleming model, an expansionary fiscal policy typically
results in a rise in domestic interest rates and an increase in economic
activity. The rise in domestic interest rates should induce a capital inflow,
which is positive for the domestic currency, but the rise in economic activity
should contribute to a deterioration of the trade balance, which is negative
for the domestic currency. The more mobile capital flows are, the greater the
likelihood that the induced inflow of capital will dominate the deterioration
in trade.
■ Under conditions of high capital mobility, countries that simultaneously
pursue expansionary fiscal policies and relatively tight monetary policies
should see their currencies strengthen over time.
■ The portfolio balance model of exchange rate determination asserts that
increases in government debt resulting from a rising budget deficit will be
willingly held by investors only if they are compensated in the form of a
higher expected return. The higher expected return could come from (1)
higher interest rates and/or a higher risk premium, (2) depreciation of the
currency to a level sufficient to generate anticipation of gains from subse-
quent currency appreciation, or (3) some combination of the two.
■ Surges in capital inflows can fuel boom-like conditions, asset price bubbles,
and currency overvaluation.


=== PAGE 72 ===


66 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
■ Many consider capital controls to be a legitimate part of a policymaker’s
toolkit. The IMF believes that capital controls may be needed to prevent
exchange rates from overshooting, asset price bubbles from forming, and
future financial conditions from deteriorating.
■ The evidence indicates that government policies have had a significant
impact on the course of exchange rates. Relative to developed countries,
emerging markets may have greater success in managing their exchange
rates because of their large foreign exchange reserve holdings, which appear
sizable relative to the limited turnover of FX transactions in many emerging
markets.
■ Although each currency crisis is distinct in some respects, the following
factors were identified in one or more studies:
1. Prior to a currency crisis, the capital markets have been liberalized to
allow the free flow of capital.
2. There are large inflows of foreign capital (relative to GDP) in the period
leading up to a crisis, with short-term funding denominated in a foreign
currency being particularly problematic.
3. Currency crises are often preceded by (and often coincide with) banking
crises.
4. Countries with fixed or partially fixed exchange rates are more suscepti-
ble to currency crises than countries with floating exchange rates.
5. Foreign exchange reserves tend to decline precipitously as a crisis
approaches.
6. In the period leading up to a crisis, the currency has risen substantially
relative to its historical mean.
7. The terms of trade (exports relative to imports) often deteriorate before
a crisis.
8. Broad money growth and the ratio of M2 (a measure of money supply)
to bank reserves tend to rise prior to a crisis.
9. Inflation tends to be significantly higher in pre-crisis periods compared
with tranquil periods.
16 APPENDIX
Currency Codes Used
USD US dollar
EUR euro
GBP UK pound
JPY Japanese yen
MXN Mexican peso
CHF Swiss franc
CAD Canadian dollar
SEK Swedish krona
AUD Australian dollar


=== PAGE 73 ===


Appendix 67
KRW Korean won
NZD New Zealand dollar


=== PAGE 74 ===


68 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
REFERENCES
Babecký, Jan, Tomáš Havránek, Jakub Matějů, Marek Rusnák, Kateřina Šmídková, and Bořek
Vašíček. 2013. “Leading Indicators of Crisis Incidence: Evidence from Developed Countries.”
Journal of International Money and Finance 35 (June): 1–19. 10.1016/j.jimonfin.2013.01.001
Babecký, Jan, Tomáš Havránek, Jakub Matějů, Marek Rusnák, Kateřina Šmídková, and Bořek
Vašíček. 2014. “Banking, Debt, and Currency Crises in Developed Countries: Stylized Facts
and Early Warning Indicators.” Journal of Financial Stability 15 (December): 1–17. 10.1016/j.
jfs.2014.07.001
Bekaert, Geert and Robert Hodrick. 2018. International Financial Management. 3rd ed.Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Daniels, Joseph P. and David D. VanHoose. 2017. Global Economic Issues and Policies. 4th
ed.London: Routledge.
Dimson, Elroy, Paul Marsh, Paul McGinnie, Mike Staunton, and Jonathan Wilmot. 2012. Credit
Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook 2012. Zurich: Credit Suisse Research Institute.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1976. “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal of Political
Economy 84 (6): 1161–76. 10.1086/260506
Matsangou, Elizabeth. 2015. “Failing Banks, Winning Economy: The Truth about Iceland’s
Recovery.” World Finance (15 September).
Rosenberg, Michael R. 1996. Currency Forecasting: A Guide to Fundamental and Technical
Models of Exchange Rate Determination. Chicago: Irwin Professional Publishing.
Rosenberg, Michael R. 2003. Exchange Rate Determination: Models and Strategies for Exchange
Rate Forecasting. New York: McGraw-Hill.


=== PAGE 75 ===


Practice Problems 69
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions
1-5
Ed Smith is a new trainee in the foreign exchange (FX) services department of a
major global bank. Smith’s focus is to assist senior FX trader Feliz Mehmet, CFA.
Mehmet mentions that an Indian corporate client exporting to the United King-
dom wants to estimate the potential hedging cost for a sale closing in one year.
Smith is to determine the premium/discount for an annual (360-day) forward
contract using the exchange rate data presented in Exhibit 1.
Exhibit 1: Select Currency Data for GBP and INR
Spot (INR/GBP) 79.5093
Annual (360-day) MRR (GBP) 5.43%
Annual (360-day) MRR (INR) 7.52%
Mehmet is also looking at two possible trades to determine their profit potential.
The first trade involves a possible triangular arbitrage trade using the Swiss, US,
and Brazilian currencies, to be executed based on a dealer’s bid/offer rate quote
of 0.2355/0.2358 in CHF/BRL and the interbank spot rate quotes presented in
Exhibit 2.
Exhibit 2: Interbank Market Quotes
Currency Pair Bid/Offer
CHF/USD 0.9799/0.9801
BRL/USD 4.1699/4.1701
Mehmet is also considering a carry trade involving the USD and the EUR. He
anticipates it will generate a higher return than buying a one-year domestic note
at the current market quote due to low US interest rates and his predictions of
exchange rates in one year. To help Mehmet assess the carry trade, Smith pro-
vides Mehmet with selected current market data and his one-year forecasts in
Exhibit 3.
Exhibit 3: Spot Rates and Interest Rates for Proposed Carry Trade
Today’s One-Year Currency Pair (Price/ Spot Rate Projected Spot Rate
MRR Base) Today in One Year
USD 0.80% CAD/USD 1.3200 1.3151
CAD 1.71% EUR/CAD 0.6506 0.6567
EUR 2.20%


=== PAGE 76 ===


70 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Finally, Mehmet asks Smith to assist with a trade involving a US multinational
customer operating in Europe and Japan. The customer is a very cost-conscious
industrial company with an AA credit rating and strives to execute its currency
trades at the most favorable bid–offer spread. Because its Japanese subsidiary is
about to close on a major European acquisition in three business days, the client
wants to lock in a trade involving the Japanese yen and the euro as early as possi-
ble the next morning, preferably by 8:05 a.m. New York time.
At lunch, Smith and other FX trainees discuss how best to analyze currency mar-
ket volatility from ongoing financial crises. The group agrees that a theoretical
explanation of exchange rate movements, such as the framework of the interna-
tional parity conditions, should be applicable across all trading environments.
They note such analysis should enable traders to anticipate future spot exchange
rates. But they disagree on which parity condition best predicts exchange rates,
voicing several different assessments. Smith concludes the discussion on parity
conditions by stating to the trainees,
I believe that in the current environment both covered and uncovered interest
rate parity conditions are in effect.
1. Based on Exhibit 1, the forward premium (discount) for a 360-day INR/GBP
forward contract is closest to:
A. –1.546.
B. 1.546.
C. 1.576.
2. Based on Exhibit 2, the most appropriate recommendation regarding the triangu-
lar arbitrage trade is to:
A. decline the trade, because no arbitrage profits are possible.
B. execute the trade, buy BRL in the interbank market, and sell BRL to the
dealer.
C. execute the trade, buy BRL from the dealer, and sell BRL in the interbank
market.
3. Based on Exhibit 3, the potential all-in USD return on the carry trade is closest to:
A. 0.83%.
B. 1.23%.
C. 1.63%.
4. The factor least likely to lead to a narrow bid–offer spread for the industrial com-
pany’s needed currency trade is the:
A. timing of its trade.
B. company’s credit rating.
C. pair of currencies involved.
5. If Smith’s statement on parity conditions is correct, future spot exchange rates are
most likely to be forecast by:
A. current spot rates.


=== PAGE 77 ===


Practice Problems 71
B. forward exchange rates.
C. inflation rate differentials.
The following information relates to questions
6-13
Anna Goldsworthy is the chief financial officer of a manufacturing firm head-
quartered in the United Kingdom. She is responsible for overseeing exposure to
price risk in both the commodity and currency markets. Goldsworthy is settling
her end-of-quarter transactions and creating reports. Her intern, Scott Under-
wood, assists her in this process.
The firm hedges input costs using forward contracts that are priced in US dollars
(USD) and Mexican pesos (MXN). Processed goods are packaged for sale under
licensing agreements with firms in foreign markets. Goldsworthy is expecting to
receive a customer payment of JPY 225,000,000 (Japanese yen) that she wants to
convert to pounds sterling (GBP). Underwood gathers the exchange rates from
Dealer A in Exhibit 1.
Exhibit 1: Dealer A’s Spot Exchange Rates
Spot Exchange Rates
Currency Pair (Price/Base) Bid Offer Midpoint
JPY/GBP 129.65 129.69 129.67
MXN/USD 20.140 20.160 20.150
GBP/EUR 0.9467 0.9471 0.9469
USD/EUR 1.1648 1.1652 1.1650
USD/GBP 1.2301 1.2305 1.2303
The firm must also buy USD to pay a major supplier. Goldsworthy calls Deal-
er A with specific details of the transaction and asks to verify the USD/GBP
quote. Dealer A calls her back later with a revised USD/GBP bid–offer quote of
1.2299/1.2307.
Goldsworthy must purchase MXN 27,000,000 to pay an invoice at the end of the
quarter. In addition to the quotes from Dealer A, Underwood contacts Dealer
B, who provides a bid–offer price of GBP/MXN 0.0403/0.0406. To check wheth-
er the dealer quotes are reflective of an efficient market, Underwood examines
whether the prices allow for an arbitrage profit.
In three months, the firm will receive EUR 5,000,000 from another customer. Six
months ago, the firm sold EUR 5,000,000 against the GBP using a nine-month
forward contract at an all-in price of GBP/EUR 0.9526. To mark the position to
market, Underwood collects the GBP/EUR forward rates in Exhibit 2.


=== PAGE 78 ===


72 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Exhibit 2: GBP/EUR Forward Rates
Maturity Forward Points
One month 4.40/4.55
Three months 14.0/15.0
Six months 29.0/30.0
Goldsworthy also asks for the current 90-day MRRs for the major currencies.
Selected three-month MRRs (annualized) are shown in Exhibit 3. Goldsworthy
studies Exhibit 3 and says, “We have the spot rate and the 90-day forward rate for
GBP/EUR. As long as we have the GBP 90-day MRR, we will be able to calculate
the implied EUR 90-day MRR.”
Exhibit 3: 90-Day MRR
Currency Annualized Rate
GBP 0.5800%
JPY 0.0893%
USD 0.3300%
After reading a draft report, Underwood notes, “We do not hedge the incoming
Japanese yen cash flow. Your report asks for a forecast of the JPY/GBP exchange
rate in 90 days. We know the JPY/GBP spot exchange rate.” He asks, “Does the
information we have collected tell us what the JPY/GBP exchange rate will be in
90 days?”
Goldsworthy replies, “The JPY/GBP exchange rate in 90 days would be a valuable
piece of information to know. An international parity condition can be used to
provide an estimate of the future spot rate.”
6. Using the quotes in Exhibit 1, the amount received by Goldsworthy from con-
verting JPY 225,000,000 will be closest to:
A. GBP 1,734,906.
B. GBP 1,735,174.
C. GBP 1,735,442.
7. Using Exhibit 1, which of the following would be the best reason for the revised
USD/GBP dealer quote of 1.2299/1.2307?
A. A request for a much larger transaction
B. A drop in volatility in the USD/GBP market
C. A request to trade when both New York and London trading centers are
open
8. Using the quotes from Dealer A and B, the triangular arbitrage profit on a trans-
action of MXN 27,000,000 would be closest to:
A. GBP 0.
B. GBP 5,400.


=== PAGE 79 ===


Practice Problems 73
C. GBP 10,800.
9. Based on Exhibits 1, 2, and 3, the mark-to-market gain for Goldsworthy’s forward
position is closest to:
A. GBP 19,971.
B. GBP 20,500.
C. GBP 21,968.
10. Based on Exhibit 2, Underwood should conclude that three-month EUR MRR is:
A. below three-month GBP MRR.
B. equal to three-month GBP MRR.
C. above three-month GBP MRR.
11. Based on the exchange rate midpoint in Exhibit 1 and the rates in Exhibit 3, the
90-day forward premium (discount) for the USD/GBP would be closest to:
A. –0.0040.
B. –0.0010.
C. +0.0010.
12. Using Exhibits 1, 2, and 3, which international parity condition would Goldswor-
thy most likely use to calculate the EUR MRR?
A. Real interest rate parity
B. Covered interest rate parity
C. Uncovered interest rate parity
13. The international parity condition Goldsworthy will use to provide the estimate
of the future JPY/GBP spot rate is most likely:
A. covered interest rate parity.
B. uncovered interest rate parity.
C. relative purchasing power parity.
The following information relates to questions
14-20
Connor Wagener, a student at the University of Canterbury in New Zealand, has
been asked to prepare a presentation on foreign exchange rates for his interna-
tional business course. Wagener has a basic understanding of exchange rates
but would like a practitioner’s perspective, and he has arranged an interview
with currency trader Hannah McFadden. During the interview, Wagener asks
McFadden,
Could you explain what drives exchange rates? I’m curious as to why our New


=== PAGE 80 ===


74 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
Zealand dollar was affected by the European debt crisis in 2011 and what other
factors impact it.
In response, McFadden begins with a general discussion of exchange rates. She
notes that international parity conditions illustrate how exchange rates are linked
to expected inflation, interest rate differences, and forward exchange rates as
well as current and expected future spot rates. McFadden makes the following
statement:
Statement 1: “Fortunately, the international parity condition most relevant for
FX carry trades does not always hold.”
McFadden continues her discussion:
FX carry traders go long (i.e., buy) high-yield currencies and fund their position
by shorting—that is, borrowing in—low-yield currencies. Unfortunately, crashes
in currency values can occur which create financial crises as traders unwind their
positions. For example, in 2008, the New Zealand dollar was negatively impact-
ed when highly leveraged carry trades were unwound. In addition to investors,
consumers and business owners can also affect currency exchange rates through
their impact on their country’s balance of payments. For example, if New Zealand
consumers purchase more goods from China than New Zealand businesses sell
to China, New Zealand will run a trade account deficit with China.
McFadden further explains,
Statement 2: “A trade surplus will tend to cause the currency of the country in
surplus to appreciate, while a deficit will cause currency depreciation. Exchange
rate changes will result in immediate adjustments in the prices of traded goods as
well as in the demand for imports and exports. These changes will immediately
correct the trade imbalance.”
McFadden next addresses the influence of monetary and fiscal policy on ex-
change rates:
Countries also exert significant influence on exchange rates both through the
initial mix of their fiscal and monetary policies and by subsequent adjustments to
those policies. Various models have been developed to identify how these policies
affect exchange rates. The Mundell–Fleming model addresses how changes in
both fiscal and monetary policies affect interest rates and ultimately exchange
rates in the short term.
McFadden describes monetary models by stating,
Statement 3: “Monetary models of exchange rate determination focus on the
effects of inflation, price level changes, and risk premium adjustments.”
McFadden continues her discussion:
So far, we’ve touched on balance of payments and monetary policy. The portfolio
balance model addresses the impacts of sustained fiscal policy on exchange rates.
I must take a client call but will return shortly. In the meantime, here is some
relevant literature on the models I mentioned along with a couple of questions
for you to consider:
Question 1: Assume an emerging market (EM) country has restrictive monetary
and fiscal policies under low capital mobility conditions. Are these policies likely
to lead to currency appreciation or currency depreciation or to have no impact?
Question 2: Assume a developed market (DM) country has an expansive fiscal
policy under high capital mobility conditions. Why is its currency most likely to
depreciate in the long run under an integrated Mundell–Fleming and portfolio
balance approach?
Upon her return, Wagener and McFadden review the questions. McFadden
notes that capital flows can have a significant impact on exchange rates and have
contributed to currency crises in both EM and DM countries. She explains that
central banks, such as the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, use FX market inter-


=== PAGE 81 ===


Practice Problems 75
vention as a tool to manage exchange rates. McFadden states,
Statement 4: “Some studies have found that EM central banks tend to be more
effective in using exchange rate intervention than DM central banks, primarily
because of one important factor.”
McFadden continues her discussion:
Statement 5: “I mentioned that capital inflows could cause a currency crisis,
leaving fund managers with significant losses. In the period leading up to a cur-
rency crisis, I would predict that an affected country’s:
Prediction 1: foreign exchange reserves will increase.
Prediction 2: broad money growth will increase.
Prediction 3: exchange rate will be substantially higher than its mean level
during tranquil periods.”
After the interview, McFadden agrees to meet the following week to discuss more
recent events on the New Zealand dollar.
14. The international parity condition McFadden is referring to in Statement 1 is:
A. purchasing power parity.
B. covered interest rate parity.
C. uncovered interest rate parity.
15. In Statement 2, McFadden is most likely failing to consider the:
A. initial gap between the country’s imports and exports.
B. effect of an initial trade deficit on a country’s exchange rates.
C. lag in the response of import and export demand to price changes.
16. The least appropriate factor used to describe the type of models mentioned in
Statement 3 is:
A. inflation.
B. price level changes.
C. risk premium adjustments.
17. The best response to Question 1 is that the policies will:
A. have no impact.
B. lead to currency appreciation.
C. lead to currency depreciation.
18. The most likely response to Question 2 is a(n):
A. increase in the price level.
B. decrease in risk premiums.
C. increase in government debt.
19. The factor that McFadden is most likely referring to in Statement 4 is:
A. FX reserve levels.


=== PAGE 82 ===


76 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
B. domestic demand.
C. the level of capital flows.
20. Which of McFadden’s predictions in Statement 5 is least likely to be correct?
A. Prediction 1
B. Prediction 2
C. Prediction 3


=== PAGE 83 ===


Solutions 77
SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. The equation to calculate the forward premium (discount) is:
_Actual
_[ 360 ]
F − S = S i − i .
f/d f/d f/d _Actual (f d)
(1 + i )
d[ 360 ]
S is the spot rate with GBP the base currency or d and INR the foreign curren-
f/d
cy or f. S per Exhibit 1 is 79.5093, i is equal to 7.52%, and i is equal to 5.43%.
f/d f d
With GBP as the base currency (i.e., the “domestic” currency) in the INR/GBP
quote, substituting in the relevant base currency values from Exhibit 1 yields the
following:
_360
_____[3_6_0_]____
F − S = 79.5093 (0.0752 − 0.0543) .
f/d f/d _360
(1 + 0.0543 )
[360]
_1
F − S = 79.5093 (0.0752 − 0.0543) .
f/d f/d (1.0543)
F − S = 1.576.
f/d f/d
2. B is correct. The dealer is posting a bid rate to buy BRL at a price that is too high.
This overpricing is determined by calculating the interbank implied cross rate for
the CHF/BRL using the intuitive equation-based approach:
CHF/BRL = CHF/USD × (BRL/USD)–1, or
CHF/BRL = CHF/USD × USD/BRL.
Inverting the BRL/USD given the quotes in Exhibit 2 determines the USD/BRL
bid–offer rates of 0.23980/0.23982. (The bid of 0.23980 is the inverse of the BRL/
USD offer, calculated as 1/4.1702; the offer of 0.23982 is the inverse of the BRL/
USD bid, calculated as 1/4.1698.) Multiplying the CHF/USD and USD/BRL bid–
offer rates then leads to the interbank implied CHF/BRL cross rate:
Bid: 0.9799 × 0.23980 = 0.2349.
Offer: 0.9801 × 0.23982 = 0.23505.
Since the dealer is willing to buy BRL at 0.2355 but BRL can be purchased from
the interbank market at 0.23505, there is an arbitrage opportunity to buy BRL in
the interbank market and sell BRL to the dealer for a profit of 0.0045 CHF (0.2355
– 0.23505) per BRL transacted.
3. A is correct. The carry trade involves borrowing in a lower-yielding currency to
invest in a higher-yielding one and netting any profit after allowing for borrow-
ing costs and exchange rate movements. The relevant trade is to borrow USD
and lend in EUR. To calculate the all-in USD return from a one-year EUR MRR
deposit, first determine the current and one-year-later USD/EUR exchange rates.
Because one USD buys CAD 1.3200 today and one CAD buys EUR 0.6506 today,
today’s EUR/USD rate is the product of these two numbers: 1.3200 × 0.6506 =
0.8588. The projected rate one year later is 1.3151 × 0.6567 = 0.8636. Accordingly,
measured in dollars, the investment return for the unhedged EUR MRR deposit
is equal to


=== PAGE 84 ===


78 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
(1.3200 × 0.6506) × (1 + 0.022) × [1/(1.3151 × 0.6567)] – 1
= 0.8588 × (1.022)(1/0.8636) – 1 = 1.01632 – 1
= 1.632%.
However, the borrowing costs must be charged against this gross return to fund
the carry trade investment (one-year USD MRR was 0.80%). The net return on
the carry trade is therefore 1.632% – 0.80% = 0.832%.
4. B is correct. While credit ratings can affect spreads, the trade involves spot
settlement (i.e., two business days after the trade date), so the spread quoted to
this highly rated (AA) firm is not likely to be much tighter than the spread that
would be quoted to a somewhat lower-rated (but still high-quality) firm. The
relationship between the bank and the client, the size of the trade, the time of day
the trade is initiated, the currencies involved, and the level of market volatility are
likely to be more significant factors in determining the spread for this trade.
5. B is correct. By rearranging the terms of the equation defining covered interest
rate parity and assuming that uncovered interest rate parity is in effect, the
forward exchange rate is equal to the expected future spot exchange rate—F =
f/d
e
S —with the expected percentage change in the spot rate equal to the interest
f/d
rate differential. Thus, the forward exchange rate is an unbiased forecast of the
future spot exchange rate.
6. A is correct. Goldsworthy has been given a bid–offer spread. Because she is
buying the base currency—in this case, GBP—she must pay the offer price of JPY
129.69 per GBP.
_JP_Y_ _2_2_5,_0_0_0,_0_0_0
= GBP 1,734,906.
129.69 JPY/GBP
7. A is correct. Posted quotes are typically for transactions in 1 million units of the
base currency. Larger transactions may be harder for the dealer to sell in the in-
terbank market and would likely require the dealer to quote a wider spread (lower
bid price and higher offer price).
8. A is correct. Using quotes from Dealer A, she can find
_MXN _MXN _USD
= × .
GBP USD GBP
The bid from Dealer A for MXN/GBP is effectively
_MXN _MXN _USD
= ×
(GBP)
b id
(US D)
bid
( G BP)
bid
= 20.140 × 1.2301 = 24.7742.
The offer from Dealer A is
_MXN _MXN _USD
= ×
(GBP)
o ffer
(US D)
offer
( GBP)
offe r
= 20.160 × 1.2305 = 24.8069.
To compare with Dealer B’s quote, she must take the inverse of MXN/GBP, so she
has an offer to sell MXN at a rate of 1/24.7742 = GBP 0.0404 and a bid to pur-
chase MXN at a rate of 1/24.8069 = GBP 0.0403. Dealer A is effectively quoting
GBP/MXN at 0.0403/0.0404. Although she can effectively buy MXN more cheap-
ly from Dealer A (GBP 0.0404 from Dealer A, versus GBP 0.0406 from Dealer B),
she cannot resell them to Dealer B for a higher price than GBP 0.0403. There is
no profit from triangular arbitrage.
9. A is correct. Marking her nine-month contract to market six months later


=== PAGE 85 ===


Solutions 79
requires buying GBP/EUR three months forward. The GBP/EUR spot rate
is 0.9467/0.9471, and the three-month forward points are 14.0/15.0. The
three-month forward rate to use is 0.9471 + (15/10000) = 0.9486. Goldswor-
thy sold EUR 5,000,000 at 0.9526 and bought at 0.9486. The net cash flow at
the settlement date will equal EUR 5,000,000 × (0.9526 – 0.9486) GBP/EUR =
GBP 20,000. This cash flow will occur in three months, so we discount at the
three-month GBP MRR of 58 bps:
__G__B_P_ 2_0_,0_0_0__
= GBP 19,971.04.
_90
1 + 0.0058
(360)
10. A is correct. The positive forward points for the GBP/EUR pair shown in Exhibit
2 indicate that the EUR trades at a forward premium at all maturities, including
three months. Covered interest rate parity,
_Actual
1 + i
_f[ 360 ]
F = S ,
f/d f/d _Actual
(1 + i )
d[ 360 ]
suggests a forward rate greater than the spot rate requires a non-domestic
risk-free rate (in this case, the GBP MRR) greater than the domestic risk-free rate
(EUR MRR). When covered interest rate parity is violated, traders can step in and
conduct arbitrage.
11. B is correct. Using covered interest rate parity, the forward rate is
_Actual
1 + i
_f[ 360 ]
F = S
f/d f/d _Actual
(1 + i )
d[ 360 ]
_90
1 + 0.0033
________[_3_6_0_]
= 1.2303 = 1.2295.
_90
(1 + 0.0058 )
[360]
Because the domestic MRR is higher than the non-domestic MRR, the forward
rate will be less than the spot rate, giving a forward discount of
F − S = 1.2295 − 1.2303 = − 0.0008.
f/d f/d
12. B is correct. The covered interest rate parity condition,
_Actual
1 + i
_f[ 360 ]
F = S , (Equation 1)
f/d f/d _Actual
(1 + i )
d[ 360 ]
specifies the forward exchange rate that must hold to prevent arbitrage given the
spot exchange rate and the risk-free rates in both countries. If the forward and
spot exchange rates, as well as one of the risk-free rates, are known, the other
risk-free rate can be calculated.
13. B is correct. According to uncovered interest rate parity,
%Δ S e = i − i , (Equation 2)
f/d f d
the expected change in the spot exchange rate should reflect the interest rate
spread between the two countries, which can be found in Exhibit 3. Given the
spot exchange rate (from Exhibit 1) and the expected future change, she should
be able to estimate the future spot exchange rate.
14. C is correct. The carry trade strategy is dependent on the fact that uncovered in-
terest rate parity does not hold in the short or medium term. If uncovered inter-
est rate parity held, it would mean that investors would receive identical returns


=== PAGE 86 ===


80 Learning Module 1 Currency Exchange Rates: Understanding Equilibrium Value
from either an unhedged foreign currency investment or a domestic currency
investment because the appreciation/depreciation of the exchange rate would
offset the yield differential. However, during periods of low volatility, evidence
shows that high-yield currencies do not depreciate enough and low-yield curren-
cies do not appreciate enough to offset the yield differential.
15. C is correct. McFadden states that exchange rates will immediately correct
the trade imbalance. She is describing the flow supply/demand channel, which
assumes that trade imbalances will be corrected as the deficit country’s currency
depreciates, causing its exports to become more competitive and its imports to
become more expensive. Studies indicate that there can be long lags between
exchange rate changes, changes in the prices of traded goods, and changes in
the trade balance. In the short run, exchange rates tend to be more responsive to
investment and financing decisions.
16. C is correct. Risk premiums are more closely associated with the portfolio bal-
ance approach. The portfolio balance approach addresses the impact of a coun-
try’s net foreign asset/liability position. Under the portfolio balance approach,
investors are assumed to hold a diversified portfolio of assets including foreign
and domestic bonds. Investors will hold a country’s bonds as long as they are
compensated appropriately. Compensation may come in the form of higher inter-
est rates and/or higher risk premiums.
17. B is correct. The currency is likely to appreciate. The emerging market country
has both a restrictive monetary policy and a restrictive fiscal policy under con-
ditions of low capital mobility. Low capital mobility indicates that interest rate
changes induced by monetary and fiscal policy will not cause large changes in
capital flows. Implementation of restrictive policies should result in an improve-
ment in the trade balance, which will result in currency appreciation.
18. C is correct. Expansionary fiscal policies result in currency depreciation in the
long run. Under a portfolio balance approach, the assumption is that investors
hold a mix of domestic and foreign assets including bonds. Fiscal stimulus poli-
cies result in budget deficits, which are often financed by debt. As the debt level
rises, investors become concerned as to how the ongoing deficit will be financed.
The country’s central bank may need to create more money in order to purchase
the debt, which would cause the currency to depreciate. Or the government
could adopt a more restrictive fiscal policy, which would also depreciate the
currency.
19. A is correct. EM countries are better able to influence their exchange rates
because their reserve levels as a ratio of average daily FX turnover are generally
much greater than those of DM countries. This means that EM central banks
are in a better position to affect currency supply and demand than DM coun-
tries, where the ratio is negligible. EM policymakers use their foreign exchange
reserves as a kind of insurance to defend their currencies, as needed.
20. A is correct. Prediction 1 is least likely to be correct. Foreign exchange reserves
tend to decline precipitously, not increase, as a currency crisis approaches. Broad
money growth tends to rise in the period leading up to a currency crisis, and the
exchange rate is substantially higher than its mean level during tranquil periods.


=== PAGE 87 ===


L E A R N I N G M O D U L E
2
Economic Growth
by Paul R. Kutasovic, PhD, CFA.
Paul R. Kutasovic, PhD, CFA, is at New York Institute of Technology (USA).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
compare factors favoring and limiting economic growth in developed
and developing economies
describe the relation between the long-run rate of stock market
appreciation and the sustainable growth rate of the economy
explain why potential GDP and its growth rate matter for equity and
fixed income investors
contrast capital deepening investment and technological progress
and explain how each affects economic growth and labor
productivity
demonstrate forecasting potential GDP based on growth accounting
relations
explain how natural resources affect economic growth and evaluate
the argument that limited availability of natural resources constrains
economic growth
explain how demographics, immigration, and labor force
participation affect the rate and sustainability of economic growth
explain how investment in physical capital, human capital, and
technological development affects economic growth
compare classical growth theory, neoclassical growth theory, and
endogenous growth theory
explain and evaluate convergence hypotheses
describe the economic rationale for governments to provide
incentives to private investment in technology and knowledge
describe the expected impact of removing trade barriers on capital
investment and profits, employment and wages, and growth in the
economies involved


=== PAGE 88 ===


82 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
1 AN INTRODUCTION TO GROWTH IN THE GLOBAL
ECONOMY
Forecasts of long-run economic growth are important for global investors. Equity prices
reflect expectations of the future stream of earnings, which depend on expectations of
future economic activity. This dynamic means that in the long term, the same factors
that drive economic growth will be reflected in equity values. Similarly, the expected
long-run growth rate of real income is a key determinant of the average real interest
rate level in the economy, and therefore the level of real returns in general. In the
shorter term, the relationship between actual and potential growth (i.e., the degree
of slack in the economy) is a key driver of fixed-income returns. Therefore, in order
to develop global portfolio strategies and investment return expectations, investors
must be able to identify and forecast the factors that drive long-term sustainable
growth trends. Based on a country’s long-term economic outlook, investors can then
evaluate the long-term investment potential and risk of investing in the securities of
companies located or operating in that country.
In contrast to the short-run fluctuations of the business cycle, the study of eco-
nomic growth focuses on the long-run trend in aggregate output as measured by
potential GDP. Over long periods, the actual growth rate of GDP should equal the
rate of increase in potential GDP because, by definition, output in excess of potential
GDP requires employing labor and capital beyond their optimum levels. Thus, the
growth rate of potential GDP acts as an upper limit to growth and determines the
economy’s sustainable rate of growth. Increasing the growth rate of potential GDP is
the key to raising the level of income, the level of profits, and the living standard of the
population. Even small differences in the growth rate translate into large differences
in the level of income over time.
What drives long-run growth? What distinguishes the “winners” from the “losers”
in the long-run growth arena? Will poor countries catch up with rich countries over
time? Can policies have a permanent effect on the sustainable growth rate? If so, how?
If not, why not? These and other key questions are addressed in detail in this reading.
We first examine the long-term growth record, focusing on the extent of growth
variation across countries and across decades. We then discuss the importance of
economic growth to global investors and examine the relationship between investment
returns and economic growth. We next turn to the factors that determine long-run
economic growth before presenting the classical, neoclassical, and endogenous growth
models. We also discuss whether poorer countries are converging to the higher income
levels of the richer countries. Finally, we look at the impact of international trade on
economic growth.
Growth in the Global Economy: Developed vs. Developing
Economies
The first step in our study of long-term growth is to compare the economic perfor-
mance of countries. GDP and per capita GDP are the best indicators economists have
for measuring a country’s standard of living and its level of economic development.
Economic growth is calculated as the annual percentage change in real GDP or in
real per capita GDP. Growth in real GDP measures how rapidly the total economy is
expanding. Real per capita GDP reflects the average standard of living in each country—
essentially the average level of material well-being. Growth in real GDP per capita
(i.e., real GDP growing faster than the population) implies a rising standard of living.


=== PAGE 89 ===


An Introduction to Growth in the Global Economy 83
Exhibit 1 presents data on the level of per capita GDP and the growth rate of
GDP for a selection of economies. Because each economy reports its data in its own
currency, each one’s data must be converted into a common currency, usually the US
dollar. One can convert the GDP data into dollars using either current market exchange
rates or the exchange rates implied by purchasing power parity (PPP). Purchasing
power parity is the idea that exchange rates move to equalize the purchasing power of
different currencies. At the exchange rates implied by PPP, the cost of a typical basket
of goods and services is the same across all economies. In other words, exchange
rates should be at a level where you can buy the same goods and services with the
equivalent amount of any economy’s currency.


=== PAGE 90 ===

84 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Exhibit 1: Divergent Real GDP Growth among Selected Economies and Real
GDP per Capita, in US$
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
–1.0
2000–2018 1950–2018
aeroK eropagniS napaJ niapS ylatI ecnarF setatS
detinU
adanaC ailartsuA modgniK
drtinU
dnalaeZ
weN
anihC aisenodnI yekruT aidnI tpygE natsikaP aipoihtE senippilihP lizarB ocixeM ureP anitnegrA acirfA
htuoS

Percent growth


=== PAGE 91 ===


An Introduction to Growth in the Global Economy 85
Ethiopia
China
India
Pakistan
Indonesia
Egypt
Korea
Philippines
Turkey
Brazil
Japan
Peru
Spain
Mexico
Singapore
South Africa
Ireland
Italy
Argentina
Venezuela
France
United Kingdom
Canada
Australia
New Zealand
United States
0 20,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 100,000
US$ per annum
2018 1980 1950
Note: The measure of GDP per capita is in constant US dollar market prices
for 2011 and adjusted for cross-economy differences in the relative prices of
goods and services using PPP.
Sources: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook database for growth rates, and
Conference Board, Total Economy Database (September 2019).
In general, the simple method of taking a country’s GDP measured in its own
currency and then multiplying by the current exchange rate to express it in another
currency is not appropriate. Using market exchange rates has two problems. First,
market exchange rates are very volatile. Changes in the exchange rate could result
in large swings in measured GDP even if there is little or no growth in the country’s
economy. Second, market exchange rates are determined by financial flows and flows
in tradable goods and services. This dynamic ignores the fact that much of global
consumption is for non-tradable goods and services. Prices of non-traded goods and
services differ by country. In particular, non-traded goods are generally less expensive


=== PAGE 92 ===


86 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
in developing countries than in developed countries. For example, because labor is
cheaper in Mexico City than in London, the prices of labor-intensive products, such
as haircuts or taxi rides, are lower in Mexico City than in London. Failing to account
for differences in the prices of non-traded goods and services across countries tends
to understate the standard of living of consumers in developing countries. To compare
standards of living across time or across countries, we need to use a common set of
prices among a wide range of goods and services. Thus, cross-country comparisons
of GDP should be based on purchasing power parity rather than current market
exchange rates.
The economies in Exhibit 1 are divided into two categories: developed (or advanced)
economies and developing economies. Developed economies tend to be those with
high per capita GDP. There are no universally agreed-upon criteria, however, for
classifying economies as advanced or developing. The International Monetary Fund
(IMF) classifies 39 economies as advanced and 155 as developing. It says that “this
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic or otherwise, and has evolved over
time” (IMF 2019). Developed countries include the United States, Canada, Australia,
Japan, and major economies in Europe. Growth in the large, developed economies
generally slowed over the last few decades, with US growth exceeding that of Europe
and Japan. Also included in this group are countries such as Singapore, Ireland, and
Spain, which were poor in the 1950s but now have relatively high per capita real GDPs
because of high growth rates over the past 50 years.
The second group of countries is the developing countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin
America. Per capita GDP in these countries is lower than in the advanced countries,
but GDP is generally growing faster than in the developed countries. Although the
growth rates of the developing countries exceed those of the advanced countries,
there is significant variation in economic performance among the developing coun-
tries. China and India have been growing at a rapid rate. Meanwhile, growth in Latin
America, Africa, and the Middle East has lagged behind Asia.
What explains the diverse experiences among the developing countries and between
the developed and developing ones? Singapore, for example, had less than half the per
capita GDP of the United States in 1970 but now has per capita GDP that exceeds that
of the United States. In contrast, such countries as Ethiopia and Kenya have remained
poor, with little growth in per capita GDP. The literature on economic growth focuses
primarily on the role of capital and labor resources and the use of technology as sources
of growth. In addition to these purely economic drivers, developed and developing
countries differ with respect to the presence or absence of appropriate institutions
that support growth. These institutions enable developing countries to raise their
standards of living and eventually move into the ranks of the developed countries. We
now examine some of the key institutions and requirements for growth.
2 FACTORS FAVORING AND LIMITING ECONOMIC
GROWTH
compare factors favoring and limiting economic growth in developed
and developing economies
One of the major problems for some of the developing countries is a low level of
capital per worker. Countries accumulate capital through private and public sector
(e.g., infrastructure) investment. But increasing the investment rate may be difficult in
developing countries because low levels of disposable income can make it difficult to


=== PAGE 93 ===


Factors Favoring and Limiting Economic Growth 87
generate significant saving. The low saving rate contributes to a vicious cycle of poverty:
Low savings lead to low levels of investment, which leads to slow GDP growth, which
implies persistently low income and savings. Therefore, it is very difficult to design
policies to increase domestic saving and investment rates in developing countries.
The good news is that the savings of domestic residents are not the only source of
investment funds. A developing country can break out of the cycle of low savings by
attracting foreign investment.
Financial Markets and Intermediaries
In addition to the saving rate, growth depends on how efficiently saving is allocated
within the economy. A role of the financial sector in any economy is to channel funds
from savers to investment projects. Financial markets and intermediaries, such as
banks, can promote growth in at least three ways.
■ By screening those who seek funding and monitoring those who obtain
funding, the financial sector channels financial capital (savings) to projects
that are likely to generate the highest risk-adjusted returns.
■ The financial sector may encourage savings and assumption of risk by
creating attractive investment instruments that facilitate risk transfer and
diversification and enhance liquidity.
■ The existence of well-developed financial markets and intermediaries
can mitigate the credit constraints that companies might otherwise face
in financing capital investments. For example, banks can aggregate small
amounts of savings into a larger pool enabling them to finance larger proj-
ects that can exploit economies of scale.
Evidence suggests that countries with better-functioning financial markets and
intermediaries grow at a faster rate (Levine, 2005). Not all financial sector devel-
opments promote economic growth, however. Financial sector intermediation that
results in declining credit standards and/or increasing leverage will increase risk and
not necessarily increase long-run growth.
Political Stability, Rule of Law, and Property Rights
Stable and effective government, a well-developed legal and regulatory system, and
respect for property rights are key ingredients for economic growth. Property rights
are the legal arrangements that govern the protection of private property, including
intellectual property. Clearly established property rights create the incentive for
domestic households and companies to invest and save. A legal system—substantive
and procedural laws—is needed to establish and protect these rights. Substantive law
focuses on the rights and responsibilities of entities and relationships among entities,
and procedural law focuses on the protection and enforcement of the substantive laws.
In developed countries these rights and arrangements are well established, but they
may be lacking or ineffective in developing countries.
In addition, economic uncertainty increases when wars, military coups, corruption,
and other sources of political instability are widespread. These factors raise investment
risk, discourage foreign investment, and weaken growth. In many developing countries,
especially those in Africa, the first priority in trying to enhance growth is to enact a
legal system that establishes, protects, and enforces property rights.


=== PAGE 94 ===


88 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Education and Health Care Systems
Inadequate education at all levels is a major impediment to growth for many devel-
oping countries. Many workers are illiterate, and few workers have the skills needed
to use the latest technology. At the same time, many developing countries also suffer
from a “brain drain,” in which the most highly educated individuals leave the devel-
oping country for more-advanced countries. Basic education raises the skill level of
the workforce and thus contributes to the country’s potential for growth. In addition,
because physical capital and human capital are often complementary, education can
raise growth by increasing the productivity of existing physical capital. Thus, improving
education, through both formal schooling and on-the-job training, is an important
component of a sustainable growth strategy for a developing country. China and
India are investing large amounts in education and have successfully graduated large
numbers of students majoring in engineering and technology-related areas of study.
This effort is significantly improving the quality of their workforces.
Empirical studies show that the allocation of education spending among differ-
ent types and levels (primary, secondary, and post-secondary) of education is a key
determinant of growth, especially in comparing growth in developed countries with
growth in developing ones. The impact of education spending depends on whether
the country is on the leading edge of technology and fostering innovation or simply
relying on imitation as a source of growth. Typically, developed countries, such as
the United States, Japan, and western European nations, are on the leading edge of
technology and need to invest in post-secondary education to encourage innovation
and growth. For these countries, incremental spending on primary and secondary
education will have a relatively small impact on growth. In contrast, the developing
countries, which largely apply technology developed elsewhere, should emphasize
primary and secondary education. Such spending will improve growth by improving
the countries’ ability to absorb new technologies and to organize existing tasks more
efficiently.
Poor health is another obstacle to growth in the developing countries. Life expec-
tancy rates are substantially lower in many developing countries than in developed
ones. In Africa, tropical diseases are rampant and AIDS has had a devastating impact.
The GDP growth rate in Botswana, a huge success story in the 1970s and 1980s,
slowed dramatically during the following two decades as a result, at least in part, of
the AIDS epidemic.
Tax and Regulatory Systems
Tax and regulatory policies have an important impact on growth and productivity,
especially at the company level. Analysis suggests that limited regulations encourage
entrepreneurial activity and the entry of new companies. There is also a strong posi-
tive correlation between the entry of new companies and average productivity levels.
Studies by the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD)
indicate that low administrative startup cost is a key factor encouraging entrepre-
neurship (OECD 2003).


=== PAGE 95 ===


Factors Favoring and Limiting Economic Growth 89
Free Trade and Unrestricted Capital Flows
Opening an economy to capital and trade flows has a major impact on economic
growth. In an open economy, world savings can finance domestic investment. As a
potential source of funds, foreign investment can break the vicious cycle of low income,
low domestic savings, and low investment. Foreign investment can occur in two ways:
■ Foreign companies can invest directly in a domestic economy (so-called
foreign direct investment, or FDI) by building or buying property, plant, and
equipment.
■ Foreign companies and individuals can invest indirectly in a domestic econ-
omy by purchasing securities (equity and fixed income) issued by domestic
companies.
Both of these forms of foreign investment will potentially increase the developing
economy’s physical capital stock, leading to higher productivity, employment, and
wages, and perhaps even increased domestic savings. This suggests that developing
countries would benefit from policies that encourage investment from abroad, such as
eliminating high tariffs on imports (especially capital goods) and removing restrictions
on foreign direct and indirect investments.
Brazil and India are examples of developing countries that have benefited from
foreign investment. Foreign companies directly invested $48.5 billion in Brazil in
2010, an important source of investment spending for the Brazilian economy (see
Exhibit 19). Foreign direct investment also provides developing countries with access
to advanced technology developed and used in the advanced countries. In 1999, India
enacted new regulations that liberalized direct and indirect foreign investments in
Indian companies. Foreign institutional and venture capital investors were given
greater flexibility to invest directly in Indian entities as well as in the Indian capital
markets. These changes also made it easier for foreign companies to invest in plant and
equipment. These developments contributed to the acceleration in India’s economic
growth over the last decade (see Exhibit 1).
Capital flows are just one way that the international economy affects economic
growth. The other is through trade in goods and services. In general, free trade ben-
efits an economy by providing its residents with more goods at lower costs. With
free trade, domestic companies face increased competition, which limits their price
discretion, but they also obtain access to larger markets. The evidence of the benefits
of open markets is discussed later in the reading.
Summary of Factors Limiting Growth in Developing Countries
Developing countries differ significantly from developed countries in terms of their
institutional structure and their legal and political environments. Lack of appropriate
institutions and poor legal and political environments restrain growth in the devel-
oping economies and partially explain why these countries are poor and experience
slow growth. Factors limiting growth include the following:
■ Low rates of saving and investment
■ Poorly developed financial markets
■ Weak, or even corrupt, legal systems and failure to enforce laws
■ Lack of property rights and political instability
■ Poor public education and health services
■ Tax and regulatory policies discouraging entrepreneurship
■ Restrictions on international trade and flows of capital


=== PAGE 96 ===


90 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Although these factors are not necessarily absent in developed countries, they
tend to be more prevalent in developing countries. Policies that correct these issues,
or mitigate their impact, enhance the potential for growth. In addition to these insti-
tutional restraints, as we will see later, growth in developing countries may be limited
by a lack of physical, human, and public capital, as well as little or no innovation.
EXAMPLE 1
Why Growth Rates Matter
In 1950, Argentina and Venezuela were relatively wealthy countries with per
capita GDP levels of $6,164 and $8,104, respectively. Per capita GDPs in these
Latin American countries were well above those of Japan, South Korea, and
Singapore, which had per capita GDPs of $3,048, $1,185, and $4,299, respec-
tively. By 2018, however, a dramatic change occurred in the relative GDPs per
capita of these countries.
Real GDP Per Capita in US Dollars
Venezuela Argentina Singapore Japan South Korea
1950 $8,104 $6,164 $4,299 $3,048 $1,185
2018 $9,487 $18,255 $66,189 $39,313 $36,756
1. Calculate the annual growth rate in per capita GDP for each of the five
countries over the period 1950–2018.
Solution
The annual growth rates for the five countries are calculated as follows:
Argentina [($18,255/$6,164)1/68] − 1 = 1.6%
Venezuela [($9,487/$8,104)1/68] − 1 = 0.2%
Japan [($39,313/$3,048)1/68] − 1 = 3.8%
Singapore [($66,189/$4,299)1/68] − 1 = 4.1%
South Korea [($36,756/$1,185)1/68] − 1 = 5.2%
2. Explain the implication of the growth rates for these countries.
Solution
Differences in GDP growth rates sustained over a number of decades will
significantly alter the relative incomes of countries. Nations that experi-
ence sustained periods of high growth will eventually become high-income
countries and move up the income ladder. In contrast, countries with slow
growth will experience relative declines in living standards. This dynamic
is well illustrated in this example by a historical comparison of growth in
Argentina and Venezuela with Japan, Singapore, and South Korea. In 1950,
Argentina and Venezuela were relatively wealthy countries with per capita
GDP levels well above those of Japan, South Korea, and Singapore. Over the
next 60 years, however, the rate of growth in per capita GDP was signifi-
cantly slower in Venezuela and Argentina in comparison to the three Asian
countries. This disparity resulted in a dramatic change in these countries’
relative incomes. The per capita GDP of the three Asian countries rose
sharply as each joined the ranks of developed countries. In contrast, Argen-
tina and Venezuela stagnated and moved from the ranks of developed coun-


=== PAGE 97 ===


Factors Favoring and Limiting Economic Growth 91
tries to developing country status. By 2018, per capita income in Singapore
was more than seven times higher than in Venezuela.
Over the long run, the economic growth rate is an extremely important
variable. Even small differences in growth rates matter because of the power
of compounding. Thus, policy actions that affect the long-term growth rate
even by a small amount will have a major economic impact.
3. Suppose that GDP per capita in Argentina had grown at the same rate as in
Japan from 1950 to 2018. How much larger would real per capita GDP have
been in Argentina in 2018?
Solution:
Assuming Argentina had grown at the same rate as Japan since 1950, its
GDP per capita in 2018 would have been ($6,164)(1+ 0.038)68 = ($6,164)
(12.63) = $77,854, versus $18,255 from Exhibit 1.
If Argentina had grown at the same rate as Japan, it would have had one of
the highest standards of living in the world in 2018. The question is why the
growth rates in Argentina and Venezuela diverged so much from the three
Asian countries.
4. Venezuela plans to stimulate growth in its economy by substantially increas-
ing spending on infrastructure, education, and health care. Nevertheless,
foreign investment is discouraged, and reforms such as strengthening the
legal system and encouraging private ownership have been largely ignored.
Explain whether the measures described here could lead to faster economic
growth.
Solution
The preconditions for economic growth are well-functioning financial
markets, clearly defined property rights and rule of law, open internation-
al trade and flows of capital, an educated and healthy population, and tax
and regulatory policies that encourage entrepreneurship. Investment in
infrastructure would increase Venezuela’s stock of physical capital, which
would raise labor productivity and growth. Better education and health care
would increase human capital and also increase productivity and growth.
These measures would raise Venezuela’s growth prospects. Missing, how-
ever, are a legal system that could better enforce property rights, openness
to international trade and foreign investment, and well-functioning capital
markets. Without changes in these preconditions, a significant improvement
in Venezuela’s growth is unlikely to occur. The following table summarizes
these preconditions:
Impact of Planned Policy
Preconditions for Growth Action in Venezuela
Saving and investment Improve growth potential
Developed financial markets No impact
Legal systems No impact
Property rights and political stability No impact
Education and health Improve growth potential


=== PAGE 98 ===


92 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Impact of Planned Policy
Preconditions for Growth Action in Venezuela
Tax and regulatory polices discouraging No impact
entrepreneurship
Restrictions on international trade and flows of No impact
capital
It should be noted that the global economy is evolving rapidly and past
trends may or may not be sustained. Nonetheless, in order to provide con-
crete answers that do not require the reader to bring in additional informa-
tion, our exercise solutions must assume past patterns are indicative of the
future.
3 WHY POTENTIAL GROWTH MATTERS TO INVESTORS
describe the relation between the long-run rate of stock market
appreciation and the sustainable growth rate of the economy
explain why potential GDP and its growth rate matter for equity and
fixed income investors
The valuations of both equity and fixed-income securities are closely related to the
growth rate of economic activity. Anticipated growth in aggregate earnings is a fun-
damental driver of the equity market. Growth in an economy’s productive capacity,
measured by potential GDP, places a limit on how fast the economy can grow. The
idea is that potential GDP is the maximum amount of output an economy can sus-
tainably produce without inducing an increase in the inflation rate. A key question
for equity investors, therefore, is whether earnings growth is also bounded or limited
by the growth rate of potential GDP.
For earnings growth to exceed GDP growth, the ratio of corporate profits to
GDP must trend upward over time. It should be clear that the share of profits in
GDP cannot rise forever. At some point, stagnant labor income would make workers
unwilling to work and would also undermine demand, making further profit growth
unsustainable. Thus, in the long run, real earnings growth cannot exceed the growth
rate of potential GDP.
The relationship between economic growth and the return on equities is not
straightforward. One way to capture the relationship of equity returns and economic
growth is to use the Grinold-Kroner (2002) decomposition of the return to equity.
E(R ) = dividend yield + expected capital gain
e
= dividend yield + expected repricing + earnings growth per share
= dividend yield + expected repricing
+ inflation rate + real economic growth – change in shares outstanding
= dy + Δ(P/E) + i + g – ΔS


=== PAGE 99 ===


Why Potential Growth Matters to Investors 93
Over time, the dividend yield, dy, has been found to be fairly stable and a significant
contributor to equity market returns. The expected repricing term, Δ(P/E), relates to
changes to the P/E ratios in the market. There is some evidence that with increasing
GDP growth rates, P/E ratios trend higher as investors perceive the country and its
economy to be less risky and are willing to pay a higher price for earnings. However,
the primary impact of this repricing term is the volatility in the market’s P/E ratio
over market cycles.
Earnings growth per share is the primary channel through which economic growth
can impact equity returns. Earnings growth per share can be expressed as a function
of inflation, real economic growth, and change in the number of shares traded in the
market.
When the number of shares outstanding in a market is constant, real economic
growth translates into higher expected returns on equity. The empirical evidence on
the existence of a direct relationship between economic growth and equity returns is
conflicting and suggests that the change in shares outstanding, ΔS, termed the dilution
effect, plays an important role in determining expected equity returns. These dilution
effects vary significantly across countries for a variety of reasons, including the level
of development of the economy and the sophistication of the financial markets.
This wedge between economic growth and equity returns arises for at least two
reasons. The first reason is that publicly traded companies either buy back their shares
and increase equity returns by decreasing shares outstanding, or issue new shares
and dilute existing shareholder returns. Net buybacks, or nbb, captures the net result
of buybacks and new equity issuance at the national stock market level. The second
effect is due to some part of economic growth coming from small- and medium-sized
entrepreneurial firms that are not traded publicly on the stock market. The greater this
effect, termed the relative dynamism of the economy, rd, the greater the divergence
between economic growth in the economy as a whole and the earnings growth of
companies listed on the stock market. Expanding the ΔS dilution effect term to focus
on both components:
ΔS = nbb + rd
Exhibit 2 illustrates the divergence possible between real economic growth and equity
returns across a variety of markets, highlighting the differences in nbb and rd that are
observed across markets.


=== PAGE 100 ===


94 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Exhibit 2: Indexes with Significant Dilution Effects, 1997–2017
Real per
Capita
Real Return GDP Relative
in Local Growth, Net Buy- Dynamism,
Country Currency, r g backs, nbb rd Comments
Chile 4.8 2.9 1.1 0.0 Privatization of
Telefoncia Chile
with reduction in
number of compa-
nies in index from
32 (1997) to 19
(2017).
China 0.7 8.2 −26.5 14.9 Privatization of
large state-owned
enterprises. Change
in number of com-
panies in index from
28 (1997) to 152
(2017).
Czech 6.3 2.2 6.0 −11.7 Reduction in num-
Repub. ber of companies in
index from 19 (1997)
to 4 (2017). Loss of
38% of initial market
cap.
Egypt 9.4 2.3 5.5 −3.9 Delistings.
Reduction in num-
ber of companies in
index from 13 (1997)
to 3 (2017).
Greece −8.7 0.5 −12.7 0.2 Privatizations,
reclassification to
emerging mar-
ket, and bank
recapitalizations.
Ireland −0.8 3.8 −7.6 −1.9 Privatization of
telecom operator
Elrcom, secondary
equity offerings in
1996–1997
Poland 1.9 3.9 −11.9 7.1 Privatizations
in 1997–1998 of
state-owned com-
modity firm and
state-owned bank.
United 6.1 1.4 −1.8 2.4 For comparison
States purposes.
Note: All percent figures expressed in log form.
Source: Table derived from data presented in L’Her, Masmoudi, and Krishnamoorthy, “Net Buybacks and
the Seven Dwarfs,” Financial Analysts Journal 74, no. 4 (2018).


=== PAGE 101 ===


Why Potential Growth Matters to Investors 95
Exhibit 2 illustrates the complexity in the relationship between economic growth and
equity returns. China has the highest real economic growth rate over the period (8.2%
annual) but a relatively low real return to equity (0.7%), because of significant dilution
effects arising from the privatization of large state-owned enterprises. In contrast, Egypt
experienced much lower economic growth (2.3%) but had a much higher real return
to equity (9.4%), primarily because of a reduction of listed companies in the market
index. Exhibit 2 illustrates how diverse the experience with net buybacks and relative
dynamism is across countries and serves as evidence that this dispersion weakens the
observed relationship between economic growth and equity returns.
The relationship between economic growth and returns to equity is thus a com-
plex question. All else equal, higher economic growth should be associated with
higher equity returns. It is clear, however, that all else is seldom equal and that equity
returns are significantly influenced by dilution—coming from the need to raise new
capital to support growth, changes in equity market composition such as large-scale
privatizations, merger waves, and share buybacks. In addition, the companies traded
on equity markets represent only one part of the economy. Outside of these firms,
economic growth creates new firms, brings in new investors, and reshapes market
valuations. Economic growth in and of itself does not guarantee that existing equity
investors capture the new wealth created.
Estimates of potential GDP and its growth rate are widely available. Both the
OECD and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) include these estimates in their
intermediate-term and long-term economic growth forecasts for each country. Simply
extrapolating past GDP growth into the future can produce incorrect forecasts because
a country’s GDP growth rate can, and frequently does, change over time. The rapid
pace of economic transformation, privatizations, and increased economic liberal-
ization in several Latin American and European countries in the late 1990s spurred
brisk economic growth that translated into sizable stock market returns. For many
of these countries, however, this high-growth period was followed by much lower
long-run growth.
Factors or policies that cause potential growth to increase or decrease by even a
small amount will have a large compounded impact on living standards, economic
conditions, and the future level of economic activity. This reality has implications for
long-run stock market returns, as shown earlier. Being able to recognize changes in
economic factors and policies is critical for global equity investors.
Estimates of an economy’s growth potential are also relevant for global fixed-income
investors. Potential GDP forecasts can gauge inflationary pressures in the economy
that arise from cyclical variations in actual output growth relative to the economy’s
long-term potential growth rate. Specifically, actual GDP growth above (below) the
potential GDP growth rate puts upward (downward) pressure on inflation, which puts
corresponding pressure on nominal interest rates and bond prices.
The growth rate of potential GDP is also an important factor for the level of real
interest rates and, therefore, real asset returns in general. Faster growth in potential
GDP translates into higher real interest rates and higher expected real asset returns
in general. Higher real interest rates are required to induce savings to fund capital
accumulation, which in turn can fuel higher potential GDP growth rates.
Potential GDP and its growth rate enter into fixed-income analysis in other ways
as well. Among them are the following:
1. A higher rate of potential GDP growth improves the general credit quality
of fixed-income securities. Credit rating agencies use the growth rate of
potential GDP in evaluating the credit risk of sovereign debt. All else equal,
slower estimated potential GDP growth raises the perceived risk of these
bonds.


=== PAGE 102 ===


96 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
2. Monetary policy decisions are affected by the difference between an econo-
my’s estimated potential output and its actual operating level (referred to as
the output gap) and by the growth of actual GDP relative to the long-term
sustainable growth rate. Thus, fixed-income investors need to closely mon-
itor the output gap and growth rates of actual and potential GDP to assess
the likelihood of a change in central bank policy.
3. Government budget deficits typically increase during recessions and
decrease during expansions. In examining fiscal policy, actual fiscal posi-
tions are often judged relative to structural or cyclically adjusted deficits, a
theoretical budgetary balance that would exist if the economy were operat-
ing at its potential GDP.
EXAMPLE 2
Impact on Equity and Fixed Income Investors
Your firm subscribes to asset class risk and return estimates generated by a
vendor. The equity market return estimates are based primarily on long-term
average index returns. Following a multi-year period of very high equity returns
driven by unusually high earnings growth and expanding P/E multiples, capital’s
share of total income as well as valuation multiples are near all-time highs. Based
on the latest data, the vendor projects that over the long run, your domestic
equity market will return 13.5% per year—11% annual appreciation and 2.5%
dividend yield—forever.
Your firm also subscribes to a macroeconomic forecasting service that pro-
vides, in addition to shorter-term projections, estimates of the long-term growth
rate of potential GDP and the long-term inflation rate. This service forecasts
3.25% real growth in the future and 3.75% inflation, down from 4.0% and 5.0%,
respectively, over the last 75 years.
1. Why might you have greater confidence in the macroeconomic service’s
forecasts than in the vendor’s equity market return forecast?
Solution
High volatility makes equity returns very hard to predict based on their own
history. Extrapolating historical equity returns does not factor in changes
in economic conditions, valuation changes, and the potential for economic
growth.
Long-term real GDP growth rates tend to be far less volatile, especially
for developed economies such as the United States or the euro area, be-
cause long-term potential growth is driven by slowly evolving fundamental
economic forces. Similarly, for countries with prudent monetary policies,
inflation rates are much less volatile than stock prices. Thus, one could
reasonably place much higher confidence in forecasts of long-term real and
nominal (real growth plus inflation) GDP growth than in equity market
return forecasts based on historical equity returns.
2. Assuming the macroeconomic forecasts are accurate, what implicit assump-
tions underlie the vendor’s forecast of 11% equity market appreciation?
Solution
Using the Grinold-Kroner framework, equity market returns can be at-
tributed to (1) dividend yield, (2) expansion/contraction of the price-to-
earnings ratio, (3) nominal GDP growth, and (4) change in shares outstand-


=== PAGE 103 ===


Production Function and Growth Accounting 97
ing. The macroeconomic forecast indicates that nominal GDP will grow at
7% (3.25% real + 3.75% inflation). So, the vendor’s forecast of 11% equity
market appreciation implies a 4% annual combined contribution from
expansion in the P/E multiple and/or change in shares outstanding of GDP
over the long run, an assumption that cannot hold.
3. Assuming the macroeconomic forecasts are accurate, what would be a more
reasonable forecast for long-term equity returns?
Solution
Neither the P/E nor the profit share of GDP can grow at a high rate forever.
A much more reasonable forecast of long-term equity market returns would
be the projected 7% growth rate of nominal GDP plus the 2.5% dividend
yield. A projected equity return of 9.5% over the long run is much more rea-
sonable, subject to variability in dividend yields and price-to-earnings ratios.
4. In addition to its long-term potential GDP forecast, the macroeconomic
forecasting service estimates sluggish 1.5% GDP growth for the next year.
Based on this short-term GDP forecast, the bond analyst at your firm
recommends that the firm increase its fixed-income investments. What
assumptions underlie the bond analyst’s forecast?
Solution
With forecasted actual GDP growth well below the growth in potential GDP,
the bond analyst assumes a growing output gap or slack in the economy
(i.e., there may be a slowdown in the economic cycle). This slack may place
downward pressure on inflation and reduce inflationary expectations. To
close this gap, the central bank may need to lower short-term interest rates
and ease policy. In such an environment, bond prices should rise.
PRODUCTION FUNCTION AND GROWTH 4
ACCOUNTING
contrast capital deepening investment and technological progress
and explain how each affects economic growth and labor
productivity
demonstrate forecasting potential GDP based on growth accounting
relations
What are the forces driving long-run economic growth? The following sections dis-
cuss labor, physical and human capital, technology, and other factors, such as natural
resources and public infrastructure, as inputs to economic growth and production
functions and how changes in such inputs affect growth. We begin the discussion by
presenting one of the simplest useful models of the production function.


=== PAGE 104 ===


98 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Production Function
A production function is a model of the quantitative link between the inputs (factors
of production), technology, and output. A two-factor aggregate production function
with labor and capital as the inputs can be represented as
Y = AF(K,L), (1)
where Y denotes the level of aggregate output in the economy, L is the quantity of labor
or number of workers or hours worked in the economy, and K is an estimate of the
capital services provided by the stock of equipment and structures used to produce
goods and services. The function F( ) embodies the fact that capital and labor can be
used in various combinations to produce output.
In the production function above, A is a multiplicative scale factor referred to as
total factor productivity (TFP). Note that an increase in TFP implies a proportionate
increase in output for any combination of inputs. Hence, TFP reflects the general
level of productivity or technology in the economy. The state of technology embod-
ies the cumulative effects of scientific advances, applied research and development,
improvements in management methods, and ways of organizing production that raise
the productive capacity of factories and offices.
It is worth noting that both the function F( ) and the scale factor A reflect technol-
ogy. An innovation that makes it possible to produce the same output with the same
amount of capital but fewer workers would be reflected in a change in the function F(
) because the relative productivity of labor and capital has been altered. In contrast, an
increase in TFP does not affect the relative productivity of the inputs. As is standard
in the analysis of economic growth, unless stated otherwise, the level of “technology”
should be interpreted as referring to TFP.
To obtain concrete results, it is useful to use a specific functional form for the
production function. The Cobb–Douglas production function, given by
F(K,L) = KαL1−α, (2)
is widely used because it is easy to analyze and does a good job of fitting the
historic data relating inputs and output. The parameter α determines the shares of
output (factor shares) paid by companies to capital and labor and is assumed to have
a value between 0 and 1. The reason for this follows from basic microeconomics. In
a competitive economy, factors of production are paid their marginal product. Profit
maximization requires that the marginal product of capital equal the rental price
of capital and the marginal product of labor equal the (real) wage rate. In the case
of capital, the marginal product of capital (MPK) for the Cobb–Douglas production
function is1
MPK = αAKα−1L1−α = αY/K.
Setting the MPK equal to the rental price (r) of capital,
αY/K = r.
If we solve this equation for α, we find that it equals the ratio of capital income, rK,
to output or GDP, Y. Thus, α is the share of GDP paid out to the suppliers of capital.
A similar calculation shows that 1 − α is the share of income paid to labor. This result
is important because it is easy to estimate α for an economy by simply looking at
capital’s share of income in the national income accounts.
1 The marginal product of capital is simply the derivative of output with respect to capital. This relationship
can be approximated as ΔY/ΔK ≈ [A(K + ΔK)αL1−α − AKαL1−α]/ΔK ≈ [AαKα−1ΔKL1−α]/ΔK = AαKα−1L1-α
= αY/K. The approximation becomes exact for very small increments, ΔK.


=== PAGE 105 ===


Production Function and Growth Accounting 99
The Cobb–Douglas production function exhibits two important properties that
explain the relationship between the inputs and the output. First, the Cobb–Douglas
production function exhibits constant returns to scale. This means that if all the
inputs into the production process are increased by the same percentage, then out-
put rises by that percentage. Under the assumption of constant returns to scale, we
can modify the production function (Equation 1) and examine the determinants of
the quantity of output per worker. Multiplying the production function by 1/L gives
Y/L = AF(K/L,L/L) = AF(K/L,1).
Defining y = Y/L as the output per worker or (average) labor productivity and k
= K/L as the capital-to-labor ratio, the expression becomes
y = AF(k,1).
Specifying the Cobb–Douglas production function in output per worker terms,
where again lower case letters denote variables measured on a per capita basis, we get
y = Y/L = A(K/L)α(L/L)1−α = Akα. (3)
This equation tells us that the amount of goods a worker can produce (labor produc-
tivity) depends on the amount of capital available for each worker (capital-to-labor
ratio), technology or TFP, and the share of capital in GDP (α). It is important to note
that this equation contains two different measures of productivity or efficiency. Labor
productivity measures the output produced by a unit of labor, dividing the output
(GDP) by the labor input used to produce that output (y = Y/L). TFP is a scale factor
that multiplies the impact of the capital and labor inputs. Changes in TFP are estimated
using a growth accounting method discussed in the next section.
A second important property of the model is the relation between an individual
input and the level of output produced. The Cobb–Douglas production function
exhibits diminishing marginal productivity with respect to each individual input.
Marginal productivity is the extra output produced from a one-unit increase in an
input keeping the other inputs unchanged. It applies to any input as long as the other
inputs are held constant. For example, if we have a factory of a fixed size and we add
more workers to the factory, the marginal productivity of labor measures how much
additional output each additional worker will produce. Diminishing marginal pro-
ductivity means that at some point, the extra output obtained from each additional
unit of the input will decline. To continue our example, if we hire more workers at the
existing factory (fixed capital input in this case), each additional worker adds less to
output than the previously hired worker does, and average labor productivity (y) falls.
The significance of diminishing marginal returns in the Cobb–Douglas produc-
tion function depends on the value of α. A value of α close to zero means diminishing
marginal returns to capital are very significant and the extra output made possible
by additional capital declines quickly as capital increases. In contrast, a value of α
close to one means that the next unit of capital increases output almost as much as
the previous unit of capital. In this case, diminishing marginal returns still occur but
the impact is relatively small. Note that the exponents on the K and L variables in
the Cobb–Douglas production function sum to one, indicating constant returns to
scale—that is, there are no diminishing marginal returns if both inputs are increased
proportionately.
Growth Accounting
Since the publication of Solow’s seminal work (Solow 1957), growth accounting has
been used to analyze the performance of economies. The growth accounting equation
is essentially the production function written in the form of growth rates. It starts
with the Cobb–Douglas production function and decomposes the percentage change
in output into components attributable to capital, labor, and technology:


=== PAGE 106 ===


100 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
ΔY/Y = ΔA/A + αΔK/K + (1 − α)ΔL/L (4)
The growth accounting equation states that the growth rate of output equals the rate
of technological change plus α times the growth rate of capital plus (1 − α) multiplied
by the growth rate of labor. Because a 1% increase in capital leads to an α% increase
in output, α is the elasticity of output with respect to capital. Similarly, (1 − α) is the
elasticity of output with respect to labor. Thus, in the Cobb–Douglas production
function, the exponents α and (1 − α) play dual roles as both output elasticities and the
shares of income paid to each factor. Note that the impact of any unspecified inputs
(e.g., natural resources) is subsumed into the TFP component.
Data on output, capital, labor, and the elasticities of capital and labor are avail-
able for most developed countries. The rate of technological change is not directly
measured and must therefore be estimated. The elasticities of capital and labor in the
growth accounting equation are the relative shares of capital (α) and labor (1 − α) in
national income and are estimated from the GDP accounts. For the United States,
the relative shares of labor and capital are approximately 0.7 and 0.3, respectively.
This means that an increase in the growth rate of labor will have a significantly larger
impact—roughly double—on potential GDP growth than will an equivalent increase in
the growth rate of capital, holding all else equal. For example, because capital’s share
in GDP in the US economy is 0.3, a 1% increase in the amount of capital available for
each worker increases output by only 0.3%. An equivalent increase in the labor input
would boost growth by 0.7%.
The growth accounting equation has a number of uses in studying an economy.
First, Solow used the equation to estimate the contribution of technological progress
to economic growth. Solow estimated the growth in TFP as a residual in the preceding
equation by plugging in ∆Y/Y, ∆K/K, ∆L/L, and α and solving for ∆A/A. This residual
measures the amount of output that cannot be explained by growth in capital or labor
and can thus be regarded as progress in TFP.
Second, the growth accounting equation is used to empirically measure the sources
of growth in an economy. In such studies, the growth accounting equation is used
to quantify the contribution of each factor to long-term growth in an economy and
answer such questions as the following: How important are labor and demographic
factors to growth? What is the contribution of capital, and how important is capital
deepening as a source of growth? What is the impact of TFP? The growth accounting
equation can be expanded by considering different forms of capital and labor inputs,
such as human capital and knowledge capital, and by considering the quality of the
inputs as well.
Finally, the growth accounting equation is used to measure potential output.
Potential GDP is estimated using Equation 4 with trend estimates of labor and capital
and α estimated as one minus the labor share of GDP. The difficult task is estimating
the growth rate of TFP, which, by definition, is a residual in the growth accounting
equation TFP is computed as the growth in output less the growth in the factor inputs.
These inputs include labor and capital in the traditional Solow two-factor production
model. If the production function is expanded by including more inputs, the weighted
growth rates of these inputs would also be subtracted from the growth in output. The
standard methodology treats TFP as exogenous and estimates its growth rate using
various time-series models.
An alternative method of measuring potential GDP is the labor productivity
growth accounting equation. It is very similar to the Solow approach but is simpler
and models potential GDP as a function of the labor input and the productivity of the
labor input. It avoids the need to estimate the capital input and the difficulty associ-
ated with computing total factor productivity. The disadvantage is that it incorporates
both capital deepening and TFP progress in the productivity term in a way that can
be difficult to analyze and to predict over long periods. Under this approach, the
equation for estimating potential GDP is


=== PAGE 107 ===


Capital Deepening vs. Technological Progress 101
Growth rate in potential GDP = Long-term growth rate of labor force
. (5)
+ Long-term growth rate in labor productivity
Thus, potential GDP growth is a combination of the long-term growth rate of the
labor force and the long-term growth rate of labor productivity. If the labor force
is growing at 1% per year and productivity per worker is rising at 2% per year, then
potential GDP is rising at 3% per year.
Extending the Production Function
As a simplification, the production function in Equation 1 focused on only the labor
and capital inputs. A more complete specification of the production function expands
the list of inputs to include the following:
■ Raw materials: natural resources such as oil, lumber, and available land (N)
■ Quantity of labor: the number of workers in the country (L)
■ Human capital: education and skill level of these workers (H)
■ Information, computer, and telecommunications (ICT) capital: computer
hardware, software, and communication equipment (K )
IT
■ Non-ICT capital: transport equipment, metal products and plant machin-
ery other than computer hardware and communications equipment, and
non-residential buildings and other structures (K )
NT
■ Public capital: infrastructure owned and provided by the government (K )
P
■ Technological knowledge: the production methods used to convert inputs
into final products, reflected by total factor productivity (A)
The expanded production function is expressed mathematically as
Y = AF(N,L,H,K ,K ,K ).
IT NT P
The impact of each of these inputs on economic growth is addressed in the fol-
lowing sections.
CAPITAL DEEPENING VS. TECHNOLOGICAL 5
PROGRESS
The property of diminishing marginal returns plays an important role in assessing the
contribution of capital and technology to economic growth. Exhibit 3 shows the rela-
tionship between per capita output and the capital-to-labor ratio. It shows that adding
more and more capital to a fixed number of workers increases per capita output but
at a decreasing rate. Looking at Exhibit 3 and Example 3, we can think of growth in
per capita output coming from two sources: capital deepening and an improvement
in technology, often referred to as technological progress.


=== PAGE 108 ===


102 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Exhibit 3: Per Capita Production Function Capital Deepening vs.
Technological (TFP) Progress
Output per Worker
C
(Y/L)
C
Effect of
Increase in TFP
(Y/L) B D
B
Effect of
Capital
(Y/L)
A A Deepening
(K/L) (K/L) (K/L) Capital per
A B D
Worker
Capital deepening, an increase in the capital-to-labor ratio, is reflected in the exhibit
by a move along the production function from point A to point B. The increase in the
capital-to-labor ratio reflects rising investment in the economy. The ratio will increase
as long as the growth rate of capital (net investment) exceeds the growth rate of labor.
Once the capital-to-labor ratio becomes very high, however, as at point B, further
additions to capital have relatively little impact on per capita output (e.g., moving to
point D). This dynamic occurs because the marginal product of capital declines as
more capital is added to the labor input.
At the point at which the marginal product of capital equals its marginal cost, profit
maximizing producers will stop adding capital (i.e., stop increasing the capital-to-labor
ratio). As we will discuss later, this point is very significant in the neoclassical model
of growth because per capita growth in the economy will come to a halt. Once the
economy reaches this steady state, capital deepening cannot be a source of sustained
growth in the economy. Only when the economy is operating below the steady state
and when the marginal product of capital exceeds its marginal cost can capital deep-
ening raise per capita growth. Note that once technological progress (TFP growth)
is introduced, the capital-to-labor ratio will have to keep increasing just to keep the
marginal productivity of capital equal to its marginal cost. But the point remains:
Once that equality is attained, companies will not increase the capital-to-labor ratio
faster than is necessary to maintain that equality.
The neoclassical model’s stark implication that more-rapid capital accumulation—
that is, higher rates of investment—cannot result in a permanently higher rate of per
capita growth is somewhat disappointing. As we will see in our discussion of endog-
enous growth, capital accumulation can result in a permanently higher growth rate if
the investment results not just in more capital (i.e., pure capital deepening) but also
in new, innovative products and processes. That is, if the additional capital embodies
new, more efficient methods of production or previously unavailable products, then
more rapid capital accumulation can result in a permanently higher growth rate of
per capita output.
In contrast to moves along a given production function, an improvement in TFP
causes a proportional upward shift in the entire production function. As a result,
the economy can produce higher output per worker for a given level of capital per


=== PAGE 109 ===


Capital Deepening vs. Technological Progress 103
worker. This dynamic is shown in Exhibit 3 by the move from B to C. Technological
progress also increases the marginal product of capital relative to its marginal cost.
This increase makes additional capital investments profitable and tends to mitigate
the limits imposed on growth by diminishing marginal returns. In addition, contin-
ued growth in per capita output is possible even in the steady state as long as there
is ongoing technological progress (increases in TFP). In summary, sustained growth
in per capita output requires progress in TFP.
EXAMPLE 3
Capital Deepening vs. Technological Progress
One of main differences between developed and developing countries is the
amount of capital available for each worker. Country A is an advanced economy
with $100,000 of capital available for each worker and thus a high capital-to-labor
ratio. In contrast, Country B is a developing country with only $5,000 of capital
available for each worker.
What impact will the following developments have on the growth rate of poten-
tial GDP?
1. An increase in business investment in both countries
Solution
An increase in business investment will raise the capital-to-labor ratio in
both countries. It results in capital deepening and a movement along the per
worker production function. The impact on growth, however, will be signifi-
cantly different for the two countries. Country B will experience an increase
in output per worker and thus in the growth rate of potential GDP. This is
because Country B operates at a low level of capital per worker, at a point
like A in Exhibit 3. Diminishing returns to capital are small, so any addition
to capital has a major impact on growth. Country A operates at a point like
B in Exhibit 3, so additions to capital have little impact on growth because of
diminishing returns.
2. An increase in the amount of spending on university research in both
countries
Solution
An increase in spending on university research will increase TFP and cause
an upward shift in the production function in both countries. This can be
seen in the move from point B to point C in Exhibit 3. The shift in the pro-
duction function will raise growth in both countries and offset the negative
impact of diminishing returns. This result shows that developing countries
have the potential to grow through both capital deepening and technologi-
cal progress, whereas improvement in potential GDP growth in developed
countries is largely driven by technological progress.
3. An elimination of restrictions in Country B on the inflow of foreign
investment
Solution
The elimination of restrictions will result in higher foreign investment,
which has the same impact as an increase in domestic business investment.
This is again a movement along the production function such as from point
A to B in Exhibit 3. With diminishing returns insignificant at low levels of


=== PAGE 110 ===


104 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
capital to labor, the higher level of foreign investment will boost growth of
potential GDP in Country B.
6 NATURAL RESOURCES
explain how natural resources affect economic growth and evaluate
the argument that limited availability of natural resources constrains
economic growth
Raw materials, including everything from available land to oil to water, are an essential
input to growth. There are two categories of natural resources:
1. Renewable resources are those that can be replenished, such as a forest.
For example, if a tree is cut, a seedling can be planted and a new forest har-
vested in the future.
2. Non-renewable resources are finite resources that are depleted once they
are consumed. Oil and coal are examples.
Although it seems intuitive that countries with more natural resources will be
wealthier, the relation between resource endowment and growth is not so straight-
forward. Natural resources do account for some of the differences in growth among
countries. Today, Middle Eastern countries and such countries as Brazil and Australia
have relatively high per capita incomes because of their resource base. Countries
in the Middle East have large pools of oil. Brazil has an abundance of land suitable
for large-scale agricultural production, allowing it to be a major exporter of coffee,
soybeans, and beef.
Even though access to natural resources (e.g., via trade) is important, ownership
and production of natural resources is not necessary for a country to achieve a high
level of income. Countries in East Asia, such as South Korea, have experienced rapid
economic growth but have few natural resources. In contrast, both Venezuela and
Saudi Arabia have large oil reserves and are major producers of oil, yet both countries
have experienced subpar growth compared with the natural-resource-poor countries of
Singapore and South Korea. As was examined earlier, economic growth in Venezuela
over the last 60 years was well below that of Singapore, Japan, and South Korea.
For some countries, the presence of natural resources may even restrain growth,
resulting in a “resource curse.” Venezuela and Nigeria are two examples of countries
blessed with resources yet with sluggish economic growth. There are two main rea-
sons why this may occur. First, countries rich in natural resources may fail to develop
the economic institutions necessary for growth. Second, countries rich in resources
may suffer the Dutch disease, where currency appreciation driven by strong export
demand for resources makes other segments of the economy, in particular manu-
facturing, globally uncompetitive. The name for this phenomenon comes from the
experience of the Netherlands: Following the discovery of large natural gas fields in
the Netherlands, the Dutch guilder (the nation’s currency at that time) appreciated and
the manufacturing sector contracted. Because of this contraction, the resource-rich
country does not participate in the TFP progress that occurs in countries with more
vigorous manufacturing sectors.
In contrast, there is a longstanding concern that non-renewable natural resources
will eventually limit growth. The idea is that a combination of rapid economic growth
and a fixed stock of resources will cause resource depletion as the available pool of


=== PAGE 111 ===


Natural Resources 105
resources is used up. These concerns are probably overstated. Technological progress
(TFP from all sources) enables the economy to use fewer resources per unit of output
and to develop substitutes. The growing scarcity of specific resources will increase
their price and encourage a shift toward more plentiful substitutes. Finally, the share
of national income going to land and resources has been declining for most countries,
especially as the composition of output in the global economy shifts toward the use
of more services.
EXAMPLE 4
Impact of Natural Resources
The table below shows the share of world proved oil reserves as of 1990 for a
selection of countries, along with the growth rate of real per capita GDP from
1990 to 2018. The simple correlation between the share of oil reserves and sub-
sequent growth is not statistically different from zero.
Percentage of Avg. Real Per Percentage of
World Proved Capita GDP World Proved Avg. Real Per Cap-
Oil Reserves, Growth (%) Oil Reserves, ita GDP Growth
1990 1990–2018 1990 (%) 1990–2018
Saudi Arabia 25.75 0.4 Germany 0.04 1.4
Venezuela 5.85 2.8 France 0.02 1.1
Mexico 5.64 1.3 New Zealand 0.01 1.6
United States 2.62 1.5 Pakistan 0.01 2.1
China 2.40 9.1 Japan 0.01 0.9
Nigeria 1.60 2.1 Spain 0.00 1.6
Indonesia 0.82 3.7
India 0.75 5.2 Botswana 0.00 2.5
Canada 0.61 1.3 Ethiopia 0.00 4.6
Egypt 0.45 2.1 Ireland 0.00 4.6
United Kingdom 0.43 1.5 Kenya 0.00 0.9
Brazil 0.28 1.1 Singapore 0.00 3.7
Argentina 0.23 2.0 South Africa 0.00 2.7
Australia 0.17 1.8 South Korea 0.00 4.4
Sources: US Energy Information Administration (www .eia .gov) and IMF.
1. What might account for the fact that real per capita GDP growth appears to
be unrelated to oil reserves, perhaps the single most economically important
natural resource (aside from water)?
Solution
Energy is a vital input for any economy. Thus, access to energy resources
is critical. Ownership of raw energy resources, however, is not. Countries
that are not self-sufficient in oil or other resources acquire what they need
through trade. It should be noted that countries that lack oil may possess
other types of energy resources, such as natural gas, coal, hydropower, or
geothermal energy. In addition, countries can grow by emphasizing less
energy intensive products, especially services, and adopting more energy
efficient production methods. In sum, natural resources are important but
not necessary for growth.


=== PAGE 112 ===


106 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
7 LABOR SUPPLY
explain how demographics, immigration, and labor force
participation affect the rate and sustainability of economic growth
As noted earlier, economic growth is affected by increases in inputs, mainly labor and
capital. Growth in the number of people available for work (quantity of workforce)
is an important source of economic growth and partially accounts for the superior
growth performance of the United States among the advanced economies—in partic-
ular, relative to Europe and Japan. Most developing countries, such as China, India,
and Mexico, have a large potential labor supply. We can measure the potential size of
the labor input as the total number of hours available for work. This, in turn, equals
the labor force times the average hours worked per worker. The labor force is defined
as the working age population (ages 16 to 64) that is either employed or available for
work but not working (i.e., unemployed). Thus, growth in the labor input depends on
four factors: population growth, labor force participation, net migration, and average
hours worked.
Population Growth
Long-term projections of the labor supply are largely determined by the growth of
the working age population. Population growth is determined by fertility rates and
mortality rates. Population growth rates are significantly lower in the developed coun-
tries than in the developing countries. As a result, there is an ongoing decline in the
developed countries’ share of the world’s population. Note that although population
growth may increase the growth rate of the overall economy, it has no impact on the
rate of increase in per capita GDP.
The age mix of the population is also important. The percentage of the population
over the age of 65 and the percentage below the age of 16 are key considerations. Some
of the developed countries, especially European countries, Japan, and South Korea, are
facing a growing demographic burden as the portion of non-working elders (over 65)
grows as a share of the population. In contrast, growth in many developing countries
will receive a demographic boost as the fraction of the population below the age of
16 begins to decline. Interestingly, China is similar to the advanced economies, with
a growing proportion of the population over age 65.
Exhibit 4: Population Data for Selected Countries (in millions, except
growth rate)
Annual Growth (%),
2000 2009 2018 2000–2018
France 59.1 64.4 66.9 0.69
Germany 82.2 81.9 82.9 0.05
Ireland 3.8 4.5 4.9 1.42
Spain 40.3 46.4 46.7 0.82
United Kingdom 58.9 62.3 66.4 0.67
Russia 146.7 141.9 144.5 −0.08
Japan 126.9 128.0 126.4 -0.02
United States 282.2 306.8 327.2 0.83


=== PAGE 113 ===


Labor Supply 107
Annual Growth (%),
2000 2009 2018 2000–2018
Mexico 98.4 112.1 125.3 1.35
China 1,267.4 1,352.1 1,415.0 0.61
India 1,024.3 1,214.3 1,354.1 1.56
Source: OECD.Stat.
Labor Force Participation
In the short run, the labor force growth rate may differ from population growth because
of changes in the participation rate. The labor force participation rate is defined
as the percentage of the working age population in the labor force. It has trended
upward in most countries over the last few decades because of rising participation
rates among women. In contrast to population, an increase in the participation rate
may raise the growth of per capita GDP. In many southern European countries, such
as Greece and Italy, the participation rate among women is well below the rates in
the United States and northern European countries (see Exhibit 5). Thus, rising par-
ticipation rates among women in these countries could increase growth in the labor
force and in potential GDP. This has been the case for Spain, where the female labor
force participation rate rose from 52.0% in 2000 to 67.9% in 2018. It should be noted,
however, that rising or falling labor force participation is likely to represent a tran-
sition to a new higher or lower level of participation rather than a truly permanent
rate of change. Thus, although trends in participation may contribute to or detract
from potential growth for substantial periods, one should be cautious in extrapolating
such trends indefinitely.
Exhibit 5: Labor Force Data for Selected Countries (2018)
Percentage of Percentage of
Population under Population over Participation Participation
Age 15 Age 65 Rate: Male Rate: Female
France 18.0% 19.9% 75.4% 69.7%
Germany 13.5 21.5 83.1 76.5
Greece 14.4 21.8 75.6 59.7
Ireland 20.8 13.6 77.3 66.6
Italy 13.2 22.7 73.9 55.6
Spain 14.5 19.3 77.7 67.9
Sweden 17.8 19.9 84.9 83.2
United 17.9 18.3 81.9 74.2
Kingdom
Japan 12.2 28.1 71.2 51.4
United 18.6 16.0 76.2 68.3
States
Mexico 26.5 7.2 81.8 47.3
Turkey 23.5 8.6 78.6 38.4
Source: OECD Stat Extracts.


=== PAGE 114 ===


108 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
EXAMPLE 5
Impact of the Age Distribution on Growth: Mexico vs.
Germany
Exhibit 4 and Exhibit 5 provide population data for selected countries. The data
show that the rate of population growth and the age composition vary signifi-
cantly among countries. Thus, demographic factors can be expected to have a
significant impact on relative growth rates across countries. This effect is very
clear in the cases of Mexico and Germany. There was essentially zero growth in
Germany’s population from 2000 to 2018, while Mexico’s population increased by
1.35% annually. The age composition of the two countries is also very different.
1. How will the age distribution impact growth over the next decade?
Solution
What is important for growth is the number of workers available to enter
the workforce. Over the next decade, Mexico will receive a demographic
benefit because of the high percentage of young people entering the work-
force. This is because 26.5% of the population in 2018 was below the age of
15. In contrast, only 13.5% of the German population was below the age of
15. In addition, Germany is facing a demographic challenge given the high
and growing share of its population over the age of 65. In Mexico, only 7.2%
of the population is above the age of 65, compared with 21.5% in Germa-
ny. In sum, the lack of population growth and a rapidly aging population
in Germany will limit its potential rate of growth. Germany must rely on
high labor productivity growth, increase its workforce participation rate,
or encourage immigration if it is to increase its near-term potential rate of
growth. Meanwhile, potential GDP growth in Mexico should receive a boost
from its favorable population trends.
Net Migration
Another factor increasing economic and population growth, especially among the
developed countries, is immigration. Heightened immigration is a possible solution to
the slowing labor force growth being experienced by many developed countries with low
birthrates within the native population. The growth rate of the labor force in Ireland,
Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States has increased between 2000 and
2010 because of immigration, although it slowed substantially in the 2010–2018 period.
Focusing on the decade starting in 2000, Exhibit 4 shows the population growth rates
for Ireland and Spain at 1.71% and 1.35%, respectively. The population growth rates
were well above the population growth rates in other European countries. As shown
in Exhibit 6, this is because of the impact of immigration. The open-border policies
of both countries led to a significant population of immigrants that contributed to
a large increase in labor input for both countries. As a consequence, both countries
experienced GDP growth above the European average during this period (see Exhibit 1).


=== PAGE 115 ===


Labor Supply 109
Exhibit 6: Ireland and Spain: Net Migration
Total Total
2000–2007 2008 2009 2010 2000–2010 2011–2016
Ireland 357,085 38,502 −7,800 −12,200 375,587 186,724
Spain 4,222,813 460,221 181,073 111,249 4,975,356 1,243,375
Source: OECD Stat Extracts
EXAMPLE 6
Potential Growth in Spain: Labor Input
The scenario below is set in early 2011. The Investment Policy Committee of
Global Invest Inc. reviewed a report on the growth prospects for Spain and noted
that, with total hours worked growing at a 1.2% annual rate between 2000 and
2010, labor input had been a major source of growth for the economy. Some
members expect the growth rate of labor to slow considerably given projection
from the OECD and IMF that immigration into Spain will fall to essentially zero
over the next few years. A research assistant at the firm gathered demographic
data on Spain from Exhibit 4–Exhibit 6 and other sources. The data are presented
in the following table:
Annual Growth
2000 2010 (2000–2010)
Population (millions) 40.3 46.1 1.35%
Immigration since 2000 (millions) 4.975
Percentage of population under 15 15.0%
Percentage of population over 65 17.0%
Male labor force participation rate 80.4%
Female labor force participation 66.1%
rate
Unemployment rate 20.1%
Using this information for Spain and Exhibit 4 and Exhibit 5 for relevant com-
parison data, determine the following:
1. Whether a change in the trend growth rate of the labor input is likely over
the next few years.
Solution
The growth in the labor input depends on a number of factors, including the
population growth rate, the labor force participation rate, and the percent-
age of the population below the age of 15. The labor force in Spain expanded
sharply between 2000 and 2010, mainly because of a population increase of
5.8 million, going from 40.3 million in 2000 to 46.1 million in 2010. Looking
ahead, growth in the labor force is set to slow substantially for a number of
reasons:
■ The population increase between 2000 and 2010 is very misleading
because it is not likely to be repeated in the future. Between 2000 and
2010, immigration raised the population of Spain by nearly 5 million


=== PAGE 116 ===


110 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
people. Without the immigrants, the population would have grown
by only about 825,000 people during this period, or at an annual rate
of 0.2%. With immigration, the population growth rate was 1.35%.
The pace of immigration that occurred between 2000 and 2010 is not
sustainable and is likely to slow, which will result in slower growth in
both the population and the labor force.
■ In the short run, the growth rate of the labor force may differ from
population growth because of changes in the participation rate.
Looking at the data, the male participation rate in Spain, at 80.4%, is
very high and, as shown in Exhibit 5, is above the male participation
rates in France, Greece, and Italy and slightly below that of Germany.
The female participation rate is low in comparison to northern
European countries, such as Sweden. But it is higher than in Italy,
which is probably a better comparison. Thus, little increase is likely in
the male or female participation rates.
■ Only 15% of the Spanish population is below the age of 15. The
comparable figure from Exhibit 5 for the United Kingdom is 17.9%,
for France 18.0%, for the United States 18.6%, and for Mexico 26.5%.
Thus, Spain does not appear poised for a notable surge in young adults
entering the labor force.
In summary, growth in the labor input in Spain should slow over the next
few years, and the growth rate of potential GDP should do the same.
2. How the high unemployment rate of 20.1% is likely to affect the growth rate
of the labor force.
Solution
Reducing the unemployment rate would mitigate some of the negative
demographic factors because a reduction in the number of unemployed
workers would boost utilization of the existing labor supply. This shift would
represent a transition to a higher level of employment rather than a per-
manent increase in the potential growth rate. Nonetheless, it could boost
potential growth for a substantial period.
Average Hours Worked
The contribution of labor to overall output is also affected by changes in the average
hours worked per worker. Average hours worked is highly sensitive to the business
cycle. The long-term trend in average hours worked, however, has been toward a
shorter work week in the advanced countries. This development is the result of leg-
islation, collective bargaining agreements, the growth of part-time and temporary
work, and the impact of both the “wealth effect” and high tax rates on labor income,
which cause workers in high-income countries to value leisure time relatively more
highly than labor income.
Exhibit 7 provides data on average hours worked per year per person in the labor
force for selected years since 1995. For most countries, the average number of hours
worked per year has been declining. There is also a significant difference in hours
worked across countries. In 2018, average hours worked per year in South Korea,
at 1,993 hours, were 46.1% more than the 1,363 average hours worked per year in
Germany. The increase in female labor force participation rates may be contributing
to the shorter average workweek because female workers disproportionately take on
part-time, rather than full-time, jobs.


=== PAGE 117 ===


ICT, Non-ICT, and Technology and Public Infrastructure 111
Exhibit 7: Average Hours Worked per Year per Person in Selected Countries
1995 2005 2018
France 1,651 1,559 1,520
Germany 1,534 1,435 1,363
Greece 2,123 2,081 1,956
Ireland 1,875 1,654 1,782
Italy 1,859 1,819 1,723
Spain 1,733 1,688 1,701
Sweden 1,609 1,607 1,474
United Kingdom 1,743 1,676 1,538
Japan 1,884 1,775 1,680
South Korea 2,658 2,364 1,993
Canada 1,761 1,738 1,708
United States 1,840 1,795 1,786
Mexico 1,857 1,909 2,148
Turkey 1,876 1,918 1,832
Source: OECD data.
Labor Quality: Human Capital
In addition to the quantity of labor, the quality of the labor force is an important
source of growth for an economy. Human capital is the accumulated knowledge and
skills that workers acquire from education, training, or life experience. In general,
better-educated and more-skilled workers will be more productive and more adaptable
to changes in technology or other shifts in market demand and supply.
An economy’s human capital is increased through investment in education and
on-the-job training. Like physical capital, investment in education is costly, but studies
show that there is a significant return on that investment. That is, people with more
education earn higher wages. In addition, education may also have a spillover or exter-
nality impact. Increasing the educational level of one person raises not only the output
of that person but also the output of those around that person. The spillover effect
operates through the link between education and advances in technology. Education
not only improves the quality of the labor force, and thus the stock of human capital,
but also encourages growth through innovation. Importantly, increased education,
obtained both formally and via on-the-job training, could result in a permanent increase
in the growth rate of an economy if the more educated workforce results in more
innovations and a faster rate of technological progress. Investment in the population’s
health is also a major contributor to human capital, especially in developing countries.
ICT, NON-ICT, AND TECHNOLOGY AND PUBLIC 8
INFRASTRUCTURE
explain how investment in physical capital, human capital, and
technological development affects economic growth


=== PAGE 118 ===


112 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
The physical capital stock increases from year to year as long as net investment (gross
investment less the depreciation of the capital) is positive. Thus, countries with a higher
rate of investment should have a growing physical capital stock and a higher rate of
GDP growth. Note that the impact on growth of per capita GDP will be somewhat
smaller if the population is growing because a proportion of net investment simply
provides the capital needed to maintain the capital-to-labor ratio. Exhibit 8 shows
the level of gross non-residential investment as a share of GDP. The exhibit shows
significant variation across countries, with the investment share in the United States
being low in comparison to other developed countries.
Exhibit 8: Business Investment as a Percentage of GDP
Investment Percentage of GDP
2000 2008 2018
Developed Countries
France 19.5 24.1 22.8
Germany 21.5 20.9 21.2
Ireland 23.9 24.4 24.5
Italy 20.3 21.8 18.0
Spain 26.2 29.6 21.9
United Kingdom 17.1 17.2 17.2
Australia 22.0 28.4 24.2
Japan 25.4 24.5 24.4
South Korea 30.6 33.0 30.2
Singapore 33.1 30.5 27.0
Canada 19.2 24.1 23.0
United States 19.9 21.1 21.1
Developing Countries
Brazil 18.3 21.9 15.4
China 35.1 47.9 44.2
India 24.3 36.5 31.6
Mexico 25.5 22.8 23.0
South Africa 15.1 19.5 17.9
Source: IMF.
The correlation between economic growth and investment is high. Countries that
devote a large share of GDP to investment, such as China, India, and South Korea,
have high growth rates. Some of the fastest-growing countries in Europe in the 1990s
and for long periods since the year 2000, including Ireland and Spain, have the some of
the highest investment-to-GDP ratios. Countries that devote a smaller share of GDP
to investment, such as Brazil and Mexico, have slower growth rates. The data show
why the Chinese economy has expanded at such a rapid rate: annual GDP growth rate
in excess of 10% over long periods. Investment spending in China on new factories,
equipment, and infrastructure as a percentage of GDP is the highest in the world, at
more than 40% of GDP.


=== PAGE 119 ===


ICT, Non-ICT, and Technology and Public Infrastructure 113
As we discussed earlier, long-term sustainable growth cannot rely on pure capital
deepening. How can we reconcile this notion with the strong correlation between
investment spending and economic growth across countries? First, although dimin-
ishing marginal productivity will eventually limit the impact of capital deepening,
investment-driven growth may last for a considerable period, especially in countries
that start with relatively low levels of capital per worker.
A second, and closely related, explanation is that the impact of investment spend-
ing on available capital depends on the existing physical capital stock. As with the
share of GDP devoted to investment, the stock of capital available per worker varies
significantly across countries. In 2000, the average US worker had $148,091 worth
of capital, compared with $42,991 in Mexico and $6,270 in India (Heston, Summers,
and Aten 2009). The wide difference in physical capital per worker suggests that the
positive impact of changes in the physical capital stock on growth is very significant
in developing countries. Mexican workers have relatively little access to machinery or
equipment, so adding even a little can make a big percentage difference. In developed
countries, such as the United States, Japan, Germany, France, and the United Kingdom,
the physical capital stock is so large that positive net investment in any given year has
only a small percentage effect on the accumulated capital stock. For the developed
countries, a sustained high level of investment over many years is required to have
a meaningful relative impact on the physical capital stock even though the absolute
size of the increase in any given year is still larger than in the developing countries.
Third, because physical capital is not really homogeneous, the composition of
investment spending and the stock of physical capital matters for growth and pro-
ductivity. Insights obtained from the endogenous theory of growth (discussed later)
and from studies attempting to obtain a more accurate measure of TFP show that
the composition of the physical capital stock is very important. These studies suggest
that capital spending could be separated into two categories. The first is spending on
information, computers, and telecommunications equipment (ICT investment). Capital
spending on these goods is a measure of the impact of the information technology
sector on economic growth. One of the key drivers of growth in the developed countries
over the last decade has been the IT sector. Growth in the IT sector has been driven
by technological innovation that has caused the price of key technologies, such as
semiconductors, to fall dramatically. The steep decline in the price of high-technology
capital goods has encouraged investment in IT at the expense of other assets.
The IT sector has grown very rapidly and has made a significant contribution
to increasing the rate of economic and productivity growth. The greater use of IT
equipment in various industries has resulted in network externalities. Computers
allow people to interconnect through the internet and by email, enabling them to
work more productively. The more people in the network, the greater the potential
productivity gains. The effects of the network externalities are largely captured in
TFP rather than observed as a distinct, direct effect. The share of ICT investment in
GDP tends to be in the 3%–5% range for most developed economies. The IT sector
is still relatively small in most countries, and IT spending actually declined as a share
of GDP between 2000 and 2008 because the early 2000s recession disproportionately
affected high-technology spending.
The other category of investment, non-ICT capital spending, includes non-residential
construction, transport equipment, and machinery. High levels of capital spending
for this category should eventually result in capital deepening and thus have less
impact on potential GDP growth. In contrast, a growing share of ICT investments in
the economy, through their externality impacts, may actually boost the growth rate
of potential GDP.


=== PAGE 120 ===


114 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
It is worthwhile to note that there have been important “transformational tech-
nologies” at various stages of history. One need only consider the impact of the
steam engine, the internal combustion engine, powered flight, atomic energy,
vaccination, and so on, to realize that revolutionary advances are not unique
to information, computers, and telecommunications. All of these are, to some
extent, “general purpose technologies” (GPT) that affect production and/or
innovation in many sectors of the economy. ICT capital clearly embodies this
GPT characteristic. Nanotechnology could well become the next “super GPT,”
at which point investing in ICT may begin to look like mere capital deepening.
Technology
The most important factor affecting growth of per capita GDP is technology, especially
in developed countries. Technology allows an economy to overcome some of the limits
imposed by diminishing marginal returns and results in an upward shift in the pro-
duction function, as we noted in Exhibit 4. Technological progress makes it possible
to produce more and/or higher-quality goods and services with the same resources
or inputs. It also results in the creation of new goods and services. Technological
progress can also be one of the factors improving how efficiently businesses are
organized and managed.
Technological change can be embodied in human capital (knowledge, organiza-
tion, information, and experience base) and/or in new machinery, equipment, and
software. Therefore, high rates of investment are important, especially investment
in ICT goods. Countries can also innovate through expenditures, both public and
private, on research and development (R&D). Expenditures on R&D and the number
of patents issued, although not directly measuring innovation, provide some useful
insight into innovative performance. Exhibit 9 shows R&D spending as a share of
GDP for various countries. The developed countries spend the highest percentage
of GDP on R&D because they must rely on innovation and the development of new
products and production methods for growth. In contrast, developing countries spend
less on R&D because these countries can acquire new technology through imitation
or copying the technology developed elsewhere. The embodiment of technology in
capital goods can enable relatively poor countries to narrow the gap relative to the
technology leaders. It should also be noted that the relationship between economic
growth and R&D spending is not clear-cut. Although technological innovation result-
ing from high R&D spending raises output and productivity in the long run, it may
result in a cyclical slowing of growth as companies and workers are displaced by the
new technologies. This is the Schumpeterian concept of creative destruction, which
captures the double-edged nature of technological innovation.
Exhibit 9: Research and Development as a Percentage of GDP in Selected
Countries
1990 2009 2016
France 2.3 2.2 2.2
Germany 2.6 2.8 2.9
Ireland 0.8 1.8 1.2
Italy 1.2 1.3 1.3
Spain 0.8 1.4 1.2


=== PAGE 121 ===


ICT, Non-ICT, and Technology and Public Infrastructure 115
1990 2009 2016
United Kingdom 2.1 1.9 1.7
Australia 1.3 2.2 1.9
Japan 3.0 3.4 3.1
South Korea 1.7 3.1 4.2
Singapore 1.1 2.9 2.2
Canada 1.5 2.0 1.6
United States 2.6 2.9 2.7
China NA 1.7 2.1
India NA 0.8 0.8
Mexico NA 0.4 0.5
Source: OECD.
The state of technology, as reflected by total factor productivity, embodies the cumu-
lative effects of scientific advances, applied research and development, improvements
in management methods, and ways of organizing production that raise the productive
capacity of factories and offices. Because it is measured as a residual, TFP estimates are
very sensitive to the measurements of the labor and capital inputs. Empirical work at the
Conference Board and the OECD accounts for changes in the composition and quality
of both the labor and capital inputs. The resulting measure of TFP should capture the
technological and organizational improvements that increase output for a given level
of inputs. Exhibit 10 provides data for the periods 1995–2005 and 2005–2018 on the
growth rate in labor productivity and total factor productivity. Labor productivity
growth depends on both capital deepening and technological progress. The contribu-
tion of capital deepening can be measured as the difference between the growth rates
of labor productivity and total factor productivity. For example, from 2005 to 2018,
South Korea’s labor productivity grew by 3.3% per year, of which 2.5% (3.3% − 0.8%)
came from capital deepening, with the rest coming from changes in TFP (note that
rounding causes minor discrepancies in the calculations in the exhibit). The larger
the difference between the productivity growth measures, the more important capital
deepening is as a source of economic growth. As we discussed previously, however,
growth in per capita income cannot be sustained perpetually by capital deepening.
Exhibit 10: Labor and Total Factor Productivity
Growth
Growth Growth from Productivity
in Hours in Labor Growth Capital Growth Level 2018;
Worked Prod. in TFP Deepening in GDP GDP per Hour
(%) (%) (%) (%) (%) Worked ($)
Germany 70
1995–2005 −0.3 1.6 0.9 0.7 1.3
2005–2018 0.8 0.8 0.2 0.7 1.6
Ireland 84
1995–2005 3.2 4.1 1.7 2.4 7.3
2005–2018 0.6 2.9 0.1 2.7 3.3
United
States 73


=== PAGE 122 ===


116 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Growth
Growth Growth from Productivity
in Hours in Labor Growth Capital Growth Level 2018;
Worked Prod. in TFP Deepening in GDP GDP per Hour
(%) (%) (%) (%) (%) Worked ($)
1995–2005 0.9 2.4 0.9 1.5 3.3
2005–2018 0.9 1.2 0.0 1.3 1.9
Japan 47
1995–2005 −1.0 2.1 0.4 1.7 1.1
2005–2018 0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 1.0
South
Korea 39
1995–2005 0.0 4.3 2.4 1.9 4.3
2005–2018 0.1 3.3 0.8 2.5 3.3
China 15
1995–2005 1.1 6.7 1.5 5.2 7.8
2005–2018 0.2 9.2 4.3 5.0 9.0
India 9
1995–2005 2.1 4.2 1.9 2.3 6.3
2005–2018 1.2 6.3 1.8 4.5 7.2
Brazil 19
1995–2005 2.1 0.3 −0.3 0.6 2.4
2005–2018 0.8 1.3 −0.7 1.9 2.0
Mexico 21
1995–2005 2.2 1.4 0.4 1.0 3.6
2005–2018 2.1 0.1 −0.2 0.4 2.2
Source: Conference Board Total Economy Database.
Exhibit 10 also provides data on the level of labor productivity or the amount of GDP
produced per hour of work. The level of productivity depends on the accumulated
stock of human and physical capital and is much higher among the developed coun-
tries. For example, China has a population of more than 1.3 billion people, compared
with slightly more than 300 million people in the United States. Although the United
States has significantly fewer workers than China because of its smaller population,
its economy as measured by real GDP is much larger. This is because US workers
have historically been more productive than Chinese workers as measured by GDP
per hour worked, as shown in Exhibit 10. In contrast to the level of productivity,
the growth rate of productivity will typically be higher in the developing countries,
where human and physical capital are scarce but growing rapidly and the impact of
diminishing marginal returns is relatively small.
An understanding of productivity trends is critical for global investors. A permanent
increase in the rate of labor productivity growth will increase the sustainable rate of
economic growth and raise the upper boundary for earnings growth and the potential
return on equities. In contrast, a low growth rate of labor productivity, if it persists
over a number of years, suggests poor prospects for equity prices. A slowdown in
productivity growth lowers both the long-run potential growth rate of the economy
and the upper limit for earnings growth. Such a development would be associated
with slow growth in profits and correspondingly low equity returns.


=== PAGE 123 ===


ICT, Non-ICT, and Technology and Public Infrastructure 117
EXAMPLE 7
Why the Sluggish Growth in the Japanese Economy?
Annual growth in real GDP in Japan averaged about 1% since 1990. This growth
is in sharp contrast to the 4.2% annual growth rate experienced from 1971 to
1990. The sluggish growth in Japan should not be surprising. Japan’s economy
is growing at its potential rate of growth, which is limited by the following:
1. The labor input is not growing. Population growth has been essentially
zero since 2000 (Exhibit 5), and average hours worked per year per
person is declining (Exhibit 8).
2. There has been a lack of technological innovation. The lack of growth
in the labor input could be offset through higher productivity derived
from innovation and more efficient use of available inputs. However,
this is not occurring in Japan. Total factor productivity (Exhibit
10) increased at a sluggish 0.4% annual rate from 1995 to 2005 and
declined slightly between 2005 and 2018.
3. Diminishing returns to capital are very significant. Despite the nega-
tive growth in TFP, labor productivity growth remained relatively high.
This means that all the growth in labor productivity in Japan resulted
from capital deepening (Exhibit 10). The problem for Japan, as dis-
cussed in earlier, is that once the capital-to-labor ratio becomes high,
further additions to capital have little impact on per capita output.
Thus, the growth in labor productivity should slow.
1. Use the data for 2005–2018 and the labor productivity growth accounting
equation to estimate the growth rate in potential GDP for Japan.
Solution
To estimate the growth rate in potential GDP, we use Equation 5, given by
Growth rate of potential GDP = Long-term growth rate of labor force + Long-term
growth rate in labor productivity
To use this equation, we need to project the growth rate in the labor input
and labor productivity.
The hours worked data in Exhibit 10 are a potential source to use to estimate
the growth rate of the labor input. Exhibit 10 shows the labor input for Japan
unchanged between 2005 and 2018. This was partly caused by the negative
impact of the global recession on hours worked. As an alternative, the labor
input should grow at the same rate as the population plus the net change in
immigration. The population data in Exhibit 5 show essentially zero pop-
ulation growth in Japan for the period 2000–2018. This trend is likely to
continue. Thus, a reasonable estimate for potential GDP growth in Japan is
around 1%. We get this estimate by assuming no growth in the labor input
and a 1% annual increase in labor productivity (using data from Exhibit 10
for 2005–2018).
Public Infrastructure
The final expansion of the definition of the capital input is public infrastructure invest-
ment. Roads, bridges, municipal water, dams and, in some countries, electric grids are
all examples of public capital. They have few substitutes and are largely complements
to the production of private sector goods and services. Ashauer (1990) found that


=== PAGE 124 ===


118 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
infrastructure investment is an important source of productivity growth and should
be included as an input in the production function. As with R&D spending, the full
impact of government infrastructure investment may extend well beyond the direct
benefits of the projects because improvements in the economy’s infrastructure gen-
erally boost the productivity of private investments.
9 SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC GROWTH DETERMINANTS
Long-term sustainable growth is determined by the rate of expansion of real potential
GDP. Expansion of the supply of factors of production (inputs) and improvements
in technology are the sources of growth. The factors of production include human
capital, ICT and non-ICT capital, public capital, labor, and natural resources. Data
for the sources of growth are available from the OECD and the Conference Board.
Exhibit 11 provides data from the Conference Board on the sources of output growth
for various countries. These estimates are based on the growth accounting formula.
Exhibit 11: Sources of Output Growth
Contribution from:
Labor Labor Non-ICT ICT Growth in
Quantity Quality Capital Capital TFP GDP
(%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%)
Germany
1995–2005 −0.2 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.9 1.3
2005–2018 0.4 0.1 0.6 0.3 0.2 1.6
Ireland
1995–2005 2.0 0.3 2.6 0.7 1.7 7.3
2005–2018 0.0 0.3 2.5 0.3 0.1 3.3
United States
1995–2005 0.6 0.3 0.7 0.8 0.9 3.3
2005–2018 0.4 0.3 0.7 0.5 0.0 1.9
Japan
1995–2005 −0.6 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.4 1.1
2005–2018 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.3 −0.1 1.0
South Korea
1995–2005 −0.5 0.8 1.1 0.5 2.4 4.3
2005–2018 0.0 0.1 1.9 0.5 0.8 3.3
China
1995–2005 0.5 0.2 4.5 1.1 1.5 7.8
2005–2018 0.1 0.3 3.9 0.4 4.3 9.0
India
1995–2005 1.0 0.2 2.7 0.5 1.9 6.3
2005–2018 0.7 0.6 3.4 0.8 1.8 7.2
Brazil
1995–2005 0.8 0.1 1.1 0.7 −0.3 2.4
2005–2018 0.4 0.8 1.2 0.4 −0.7 2.0


=== PAGE 125 ===


Summary of Economic Growth Determinants 119
Contribution from:
Labor Labor Non-ICT ICT Growth in
Quantity Quality Capital Capital TFP GDP
(%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%)
Mexico
1995–2005 1.2 0.2 1.4 0.4 0.4 3.6
2005–2018 1.0 0.1 1.1 0.2 −0.2 2.2
Notes: A standard growth accounting model (expanded version of Equation 4) is used to compute the
contribution of each input to aggregate output (GDP) growth. The inputs include both the quantity
and quality of labor and ICT and non-ICT capital. Each input is weighted by its share in national
income, and TFP captures all sources of growth that are left unexplained by the labor and capital inputs.
Rounding is used throughout.
Source: Conference Board Total Economy Database.
EXAMPLE 8
The Irish Economy
As shown in Exhibit 1, economic growth in Ireland since 1980 has been sig-
nificantly higher than that experienced in the major European economies of
Germany, France, and the United Kingdom. In 1970, the per capita GDP of
Ireland, at $9,869, was 45.2% below the per capita GDP of the United Kingdom.
By 2010, per capita GDP in Ireland caught up with or exceeded most other
developed European countries. Like most of the global economy, Ireland fell
into a deep recession in 2009, with GDP contracting by more than 7%, before
staging a recovery and reaching annual growth of more than 5% for several years
in the 2010–2018 period. To understand the factors driving the Irish economy
and the prospects for future equity returns, use the data in Exhibit 11 and the
following population data to address these questions:
1. Using the growth accounting framework data, evaluate the sources of
growth for the Irish economy starting from 1995.
Solution
The sources of growth for an economy include labor quantity, labor qual-
ity, non-ICT capital, ICT capital, and TFP. The growth accounting data in
Exhibit 11 indicate that economic growth in Ireland from 1995 to 2018 is
explained by the following factors:
Input Contribution: 1995–2005 Contribution: 2005–2018
Labor 2.3% 0.3%
Labor quantity 2.0% 0.0%
Labor quality 0.3% 0.3%
Capital/Investment 3.3% 2.8%
Non-ICT capital 2.6% 2.5%
ICT capital 0.7% 0.3%
TFP 1.7% 0.1%


=== PAGE 126 ===


120 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Input Contribution: 1995–2005 Contribution: 2005–2018
Total: GDP growth 7.3% 3.3%
In sum, the main driver of growth for the Irish economy since 1995 has been
capital spending. It accounted for more than 45% of growth in 1995–2005
and has been the dominant factor contributing to growth in the Irish econ-
omy since 2005. Another way to look at growth in Ireland for the period
2005–2018 is that all the growth is through capital deepening. As shown
in Exhibit 11, capital deepening added 2.7% to growth, which caused an
increase in labor productivity of 2.9%.
2. What is likely to happen to the potential rate of growth for Ireland? What
are the prospects for equity returns?
Avg. Annual
2000 2010 2016 Growth Rate
Population (millions) 3.8 4.5 4.9 1.6%
Net immigration total 0.38m
(2000–2010)
Net immigration total 0.19m
(2011–2016)
Population less immigrants 3.8 4.1 4.3 0.8%
(millions)
Solution
If we look forward, prospects for the economy are not as favorable as in the
past. To estimate the growth rate in potential GDP, we use Equation 5, given
by
Growth rate of potential GDP = Long-term growth rate of labor force + Long-term
growth rate in labor productivity
To use this equation, we need to project the growth rate in the labor input
and labor productivity. The total hours worked data in Exhibit 11 are one
potential source to use to estimate the growth rate of the labor input. Exhib-
it 11 shows the labor input increasing by 0.6% annually between 2005 and
2018. The problem here is that the decline in hours worked is overstated be-
cause of the negative impact of the 2008–2009 recession on hours worked.
As an alternative, the labor input should grow at the same rate as the popu-
lation plus the net change resulting from immigration. The population data
for Ireland (given above) show that more than half of the population growth
between 2000 and 2010 resulted from immigration. Since 2009, however,
outward migration has replaced inward migration for a short period, and
the rate of growth in labor input declined. Thus, a more reasonable, perhaps
somewhat conservative, estimate for labor force growth is 0.3%. We also
assume the following:
1. There is no increase in labor productivity coming from capital deep-
ening as investment slows (resulting in essentially no growth in net
investment and the physical capital stock).
2. TFP growth reverts to its average growth rate of 1.7% in the 1995–
2005 period (see Exhibit 11).


=== PAGE 127 ===


Summary of Economic Growth Determinants 121
3. Labor productivity grows at the same rate as TFP.
Thus, growth in potential GDP is 0.3% + 1.7% = 2.0%.
In summary, despite the projected rebound in TFP growth, overall potential
growth in Ireland is likely to decline because labor input growth and capital
deepening no longer contribute to overall growth. As discussed earlier,
slower growth in potential GDP will limit potential earnings growth and
equity price appreciation.
EXAMPLE 9
Investment Outlook for China and India
The Investment Policy Committee at Global Invest Inc. is interested in increas-
ing the firm’s exposure to either India or China because of their rapid rates of
economic growth. Economic growth in China has been close to 9% over the last
few years, and India has grown more than 7%. You are asked by the committee
to do the following:
1. Determine the sources of growth for the two economies and review the data
on productivity and investment using information from Exhibit 11. Which
of the two countries looks more attractive based on the sources of growth?
Solution
The sources of economic growth include size of labor force, quality of labor
force (human capital), ICT and non-ICT capital, natural resources, and
technology. Looking at the sources of growth in Exhibit 11, we determine
the following:
Percent Contribution: Percent Contribution:
Input 1995–2005 2005–2018
India
Labor quantity 1.0 0.7
Labor quality 0.2 0.6
Non-ICT capital 2.7 3.4
ICT capital 0.5 0.8
TFP 1.9 1.8
Total: GDP growth 6.3 7.2
China
Labor quantity 0.5 0.1
Labor quality 0.2 0.3
Non-ICT capital 4.5 3.9
ICT capital 1.1 0.4
TFP 1.5 4.3
Total: GDP growth 7.8 9.0
■ The contribution of the labor quantity input is more important to
growth in India than in China. Labor quantity contributed 1% to
India’s GDP growth over 1995–2005 and 0.7% over 2005–2018. The
equivalent numbers for China are 0.5% and 0.1%, respectively. Looking


=== PAGE 128 ===


122 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
ahead, we can project that labor is likely to be a major factor adding
to India’s growth. The population of India (Exhibit 5) is growing at a
faster rate than that of China. The annual growth rate in population
from 2005 to 2018 was 1.34% in India versus 0.50% in China. Also,
hours worked in India (Exhibit 11) are growing at a faster rate than in
China. Therefore, the workforce and labor quantity input should grow
faster in India. The edge here goes to India.
■ The contribution to GDP made by the quality of the labor force is
essentially identical in the two countries (0.2% in China versus 0.2%
in India between 1995 and 2005 and 0.3% in China and 0.6% in India
between 2005 and 2018). This factor is stronger in India.
■ The contribution of non-ICT capital investment is significantly higher
in China (4.5% in China versus 2.7% in India between 1995 and 2005
and 3.9% in China and 3.4% in India between 2005 and 2018). The
edge goes to China.
■ The contribution of ICT capital investment was significantly higher in
China (1.1% in China versus 0.5% in India between 1995 and 2005).
Since 2005, it has contributed 0.4% to growth in China and 0.8% in
India, which has an edge.
■ Both countries spend a high percentage of GDP on capital investment
(Exhibit 9). In 2018, investment spending as a percentage of GDP was
44% in China and 32% in India. The Chinese share is higher, and this
provides China with an edge unless diminishing marginal returns to
capital deepening become an issue. This scenario is not likely for a
while, however, given the relatively low level of capital per worker in
China. China and India still have a way to go to converge with the
developed economies. The advantage goes to China.
■ The contribution of technological progress is measured by TFP.
Comparing the two countries, we find that TPF growth was higher in
India over the period 1995–2005 (1.9% in India versus 1.5% in China).
For the period 2005–2018, however, TFP growth was significantly
higher in China (4.3% versus 1.8%). In addition, expenditures on R&D
for 2016 (Exhibit 10) as a percentage of GDP were higher in China
(2.1% in China and 0.8% in India). The edge here goes to China.
■ Finally, growth in overall labor productivity (Exhibit 11) is consider-
ably higher in China than India (9.2% in China versus 6.3% in India
between 2005 and 2018). This dynamic resulted from both a greater
increase in the capital-to-labor ratio in China (because of the high
rate of investment, the physical capital stock is growing faster than the
labor input) and faster technological progress in China. The edge here
goes to China.
In sum, based on the sources of growth, China appears to be slightly better
positioned for growth in the future.


=== PAGE 129 ===


Theories of Growth 123
2. Estimate the long-term sustainable earnings growth rate using data from
1995 to 2018.
Solution
Estimates of potential GDP using the inputs from Exhibit 11 for China and
India are
Growth rate in potential GDP = Long-term growth rate of labor force (equals
growth in hours worked in Exhibit 11) + Long-term growth rate in labor
productivity.
China (using 1995–2018)
Growth in potential GDP = 0.6% + 7.9% = 8.5% (calculated as geomet-
ric mean growth rates using data for the 1995–2005 and 2005–2018
subperiods).
India (using 1995–2018)
Growth in potential GDP = 1.6% + 5.2% = 6.8%
3. Make an investment recommendation.
Solution
Growth prospects in both countries are very attractive. China’s growth po-
tential is higher, however, because of its greater level of capital spending and
the greater contribution of technological progress toward growth. Long-
term earnings growth is closely tied to the growth rate in potential GDP.
Therefore, based on the previous calculations, earnings in China would be
projected to grow at an annual rate of 8.5%, compared with 6.8% in India.
Over the next decade, ignoring current valuation, the Chinese equity market
would be projected to outperform the Indian market as its higher rate of
sustainable growth translates into a higher rate of appreciation in equity
values. Note that the global economy is evolving rapidly, and past trends
may or may not be sustained. This is especially true of China and India. To
provide concrete answers that do not require the reader to bring in addi-
tional information, our exercise solutions must assume that past patterns
are indicative of the future.
THEORIES OF GROWTH 10
compare classical growth theory, neoclassical growth theory, and
endogenous growth theory
The factors that drive long-term economic growth and determine the rate of sustainable
growth in an economy are the subject of much debate among economists. The academic
growth literature includes three main paradigms with respect to per capita growth in
an economy—the classical, neoclassical, and endogenous growth models. Per capita
economic growth under the classical model is only temporary because an exploding
population with limited resources brings growth to an end. In the neoclassical model,


=== PAGE 130 ===


124 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
long-run per capita growth depends solely on exogenous technological progress. The
final model of growth attempts to explain technology within the model itself—thus
the term endogenous growth.
Classical Model
Classical growth theory was developed by Thomas Malthus in his 1798 publication
Essay on the Principle of Population. Commonly referred to as the Malthusian theory,
it is focused on the impact of a growing population in a world with limited resources.
The concerns of resource depletion and overpopulation are central themes within the
Malthusian perspective on growth. The production function in the classical model
is relatively simple and consists of a labor input with land as a fixed factor. The key
assumption underlying the classical model is that population growth accelerates
when the level of per capita income rises above the subsistence income, which is the
minimum income needed to maintain life. This means that technological progress and
land expansion, which increase labor productivity, translate into higher population
growth. But because the labor input faces diminishing marginal returns, the additional
output produced by the growing workforce eventually declines to zero. Ultimately, the
population grows so much that labor productivity falls and per capita income returns
back to the subsistence level.
The classical model predicts that in the long run, the adoption of new technology
results in a larger but not richer population. Thus, the standard of living is constant
over time even with technological progress, and there is no growth in per capita out-
put. As a result of this gloomy forecast, economics was labeled the “dismal science.”
The prediction from the Malthusian model failed for two reasons:
1. The link between per capita income and population broke down. In fact, as
the growth of per capita income increased, population growth slowed rather
than accelerating as predicted by the classical growth model.
2. Growth in per capita income has been possible because technological prog-
ress has been rapid enough to more than offset the impact of diminishing
marginal returns.
Because the classical model’s pessimistic prediction never materialized, economists
changed the focus of the analysis away from labor to capital and to the neoclassical
model.
Neoclassical Model
Robert Solow devised the mainstream neoclassical theory of growth in the 1950s (Solow
1957). The heart of this theory is the Cobb–Douglas production function discussed
earlier. As before, the potential output of the economy is given by
y = AF(K,L) = AKαL1−α,
where K is the stock of capital, L is the labor input, and A is total factor productivity.
In the neoclassical model, both capital and labor are variable inputs each subject to
diminishing marginal productivity.
The objective of the neoclassical growth model is to determine the long-run growth
rate of output per capita and relate it to (a) the savings/investment rate, (b) the rate
of technological change, and (c) population growth.


=== PAGE 131 ===


Theories of Growth 125
Balanced or Steady-State Rate of Growth
As with most economic models, the neoclassical growth model attempts to find the
equilibrium position toward which the economy will move. In the case of the Solow
model, this equilibrium is the balanced or steady-state rate of growth that occurs
when the output-to-capital ratio is constant. Growth is balanced in the sense that
capital per worker and output per worker grow at the same rate.
We begin the analysis by using the per capita version of the Cobb–Douglas pro-
duction function given earlier in Equation 3:
y = Y/L = Akα,
where k = K/L. Using their definitions, the rates of change of capital per worker
and output per worker are given by
∆k/k = ∆K/K − ∆L/L
and
∆y/y = ∆Y/Y − ∆L/L.
From the production function, the growth rate of output per worker is also equal to
Δy/y = ΔA/A + αΔk/k. (6)
Note that these and other rate of change equations are exact only for changes over
arbitrarily short periods (“continuous time”).
The physical capital stock in an economy will increase because of gross invest-
ment (I) and decline because of depreciation. In a closed economy, investment must
be funded by domestic saving. Letting s be the fraction of income (Y) that is saved,
gross investment is given by I = sY. Assuming the physical capital stock depreciates
at a constant rate, δ, the change in the physical capital stock is given by
ΔK = sY − δK.
Subtracting labor supply growth, Δ L / L ≡ n , and rearranging gives
∆k/k = sY/K − δ − n. (7)
In the steady state, the growth rate of capital per worker is equal to the growth
rate of output per worker. Thus,
∆k/k = ∆y/y = ∆A/A + α∆k/k,
from which we get
∆y/y = ∆k/k = (∆A/A)/(1 − α).
Letting θ denote the growth rate of TFP (i.e., ∆A/A), we see that the equilibrium
sustainable growth rate of output per capita (= Growth rate of capital per worker)
is a constant that depends only on the growth rate of TFP (θ) and the elasticity of
output with respect to capital (α). Adding back the growth rate of labor (n) gives the
sustainable growth rate of output.
_θ
Growth rate of output per capita = (8)
1 − α
_θ
Growth rate of output = + n
1 − α
This is the key result of the neoclassical model. Note that θ/(1 − α) is the steady-state
growth rate of labor productivity, so Equation 8 is consistent with the labor produc-
tivity growth accounting equation discussed earlier.
Substituting θ/(1 − α) into the left-hand side of Equation 7 and rearranging gives
the equilibrium output-to-capital ratio, denoted by the constant Ψ.
_Y _1 _θ
K = ( s ) [ ( 1 − α ) + δ + n ] ≡ Ψ (9)


=== PAGE 132 ===


126 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
In the steady state, the output-to-capital ratio is constant and the capital-to-labor
ratio (k) and output per worker (y) grow at the same rate, given by θ/(1 − α). On the
steady-state growth path, the marginal product of capital is also constant and, given
the Cobb–Douglas production function, is equal to α(Y/K). The marginal product of
capital is also equal to the real interest rate in the economy. Note that even though the
capital-to-labor ratio (k) is rising at rate θ/(1 − α) in the steady state, the increase in
the capital-to-labor ratio (k) has no impact on the marginal product of capital, which
is not changing. Capital deepening is occurring, but it has no effect on the growth rate
of the economy or on the marginal product of capital once the steady state is reached.
EXAMPLE 10
Steady-State Rate of Growth for China, Japan, and Ireland
Earlier examples generated estimates of potential growth for China (8.5%), Japan
(1.0%), and Ireland (2.0%). Given the following data, address these questions:
1. Calculate the steady-state growth rates from the neoclassical model for
China, Japan, and Ireland.
Solution
Using Equation 8, the steady-state growth rate in the neoclassical model is
given by
∆Y/Y = (θ)/(1 − α) + n = Growth rate of TFP scaled by labor factor share + Growth
rate in the labor force
Using the preceding equation and data, we can estimate steady-state growth
rates for the three countries as follows:
China: The labor share of output (1 − α) is given by the average of the
labor cost as a percentage of total factor cost, which is equal to 0.561 for
China. The growth rate in the labor force is 1.2%, and the growth rate of
TFP is 2.9%.
Steady-state growth rate = 2.9%/0.561 + 1.2% = 6.37%
Japan: The labor share of output (1 − α) for Japan is 0.538. The growth
rate in the labor force is 0.0%, and TFP growth is 0.2%.
Steady-state growth rate = 0.2%/0.538 + 0.0% = 0.37%
Ireland: The labor share of output (1 − α) is 0.574% for Ireland. The
growth rate in the labor force is 0.3%, and TFP growth is 0.9%.
Steady-state growth rate = 0.9%/0.574 + 0.3% = 1.87%


=== PAGE 133 ===


Theories of Growth 127
2. Compare the steady-state growth rates to the growth rates in potential GDP
estimated in Examples 7–9 and explain the results.
Labor Cost in Total TFP Growth Labor Force Growth
Factor Cost (%) (%) (%)
China 56.1 2.9 1.2
Japan 53.8 0.2 0.0
Ireland 57.4 0.9 0.3
Sources: Conference Board Total Economy Database; labor cost based on 2008–2018, TFP growth
based on 1995–2018. Labor force growth based on assumptions and estimates from earlier
examples.
Solution
The growth rate in potential GDP for China (8.5%, estimated in Example 9)
is significantly above the estimated 6.37% steady-state growth rate. The rea-
son for this is that the economy of China is still in the process of converging
to the higher income levels of the United States and the major economies
in Europe. The physical capital stock is below the steady state, and capital
deepening is a significant factor increasing productivity growth (see Exhibit
11) and the growth in potential GDP.
This is not the case for Japan and Ireland. Both countries are operating at
essentially the steady state. The estimated growth rate in potential GDP for
Japan (1.0%, from Example 7) is only slightly above its 0.37% steady-state
growth rate. Likewise, the estimated growth rate in potential GDP for Ire-
land (2.0%, from Example 8) is effectively equal to its estimated steady-state
growth rate of 1.87%. Operating close to the steady state means that capital
investment in these countries, which results in an increasing capital-to-la-
bor ratio, has no significant effect on the growth rate of the economy. Only
changes in the growth rates of TFP and labor and in the labor share of out-
put have an impact on potential GDP growth.
An intuitive way to understand the steady-state equilibrium given in Equation 9
is to transform it into a savings/investment equation:
_θ
sy = + δ + n k
[(1 − α) ]
Steady-state equilibrium occurs at the output-to-capital ratio where the savings and
actual gross investment per worker generated in the economy (sy) are just sufficient
to (1) provide capital for new workers entering the workforce at rate n, (2) replace
plant and equipment wearing out at rate δ, and (3) deepen the physical capital stock
at the rate θ/(1 − α) required to keep the marginal product of capital equal to the
rental price of capital.
Exhibit 12 shows the steady-state equilibrium graphically. The straight line in
the exhibit indicates the amount of investment required to keep the physical capital
stock growing at the required rate. Because the horizontal axis is capital per worker,
the slope of the line is given by [δ + n + θ/(1 − α)]. The curved line shows the amount
of actual investment per worker and is determined by the product of the saving rate
and the production function. It is curved because of diminishing marginal returns to
the capital input in the production function. The intersection of the required invest-
ment and actual investment lines determines the steady state. Note that this exhibit
is a snapshot at a point in time. Over time, the capital-to-labor ratio rises at rate [θ/
(1 − α)] as the actual saving/investment curve [sf(k)] shifts upward because of TFP
growth, and the equilibrium moves upward and to the right along the straight line.


=== PAGE 134 ===


128 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Exhibit 12: Steady State in the Neoclassical Model
Output per Worker
Investment per Worker
[δ + n + θ/(1 – α)]k
sf(k)
k* Capital per
Worker
The impact of the various parameters in the model on the steady state can also be
seen in the exhibit. At any point in time when the economy is on its steady-state
growth path, the exogenous factors—labor supply and TFP—are fixed. We would
like to know what effect each of the parameters in the model has on the steady-state
capital-to-labor ratio and therefore on output per worker. For example, if there are
two economies that differ only with respect to one parameter, what does that imply
about their per capita incomes? All else the same, we can say the following regarding
the impact of the parameters:
■ Saving rate (s): An increase in the saving rate implies a higher capital-to-la-
bor ratio (k) and higher output per worker (y) because a higher saving rate
generates more saving/investment at every level of output. In Exhibit 13,
the saving/investment curve [sf(k)] shifts upward from an initial steady-state
equilibrium at point A to a new equilibrium at point B. At the new equilib-
rium point, it intersects the required investment line [δ + n + θ/(1 − α)] at
higher capital-to-labor and output per worker ratios. Note that although the
higher saving rate increases both k and y, it has no impact on the steady-
state growth rates of output per capita or output (Equation 8).


=== PAGE 135 ===


Theories of Growth 129
Exhibit 13: Impact on the Steady State: Increase in the Saving Rate
Output per Worker
Investment per Worker
[δ + n + θ/(1 – α)]k
s f(k)
B 2
(Y/L)
B
s f(k)
1
(Y/L)
A
A
(K/L) (K/L) Capital per
A B
Worker
■ Labor force growth (n): An increase in the labor force growth rate reduces
the equilibrium capital-to-labor ratio because a corresponding increase in
the steady-state growth rate of capital is required. Given the gross sav-
ing/investment rate, this can be achieved only at a lower capital-to-labor
ratio. Output per worker is correspondingly lower as well. In Exhibit 14,
the higher population growth rate increases the slope of the required
investment line. This shifts the steady-state equilibrium from point A to
point B, where it intersects the supply of saving/investment curve at lower
capital-to-labor and output per worker ratios.
■ Depreciation rate (δ): An increase in the depreciation rate reduces the equi-
librium capital-to-labor and output per worker ratios because a given rate of
gross saving generates less net capital accumulation. Graphically, it increases
the slope of the required investment line and affects the steady-state equilib-
rium in the same way as labor force growth (Exhibit 14).
■ Growth in TFP (θ): An increase in the growth rate of TFP reduces the
steady-state capital-to-labor ratio and output per worker for given levels
of labor input and TFP. This result must be interpreted with care. Raising
the growth rate of TFP means that output per worker will grow faster in
the future (Equation 8), but at a given point in time, a given supply of labor,
and a given level of TFP, output per worker is lower than it would be with a
slower TFP growth rate. In effect, the economy is on a steeper trajectory off
a lower base of output per worker. Graphically, it is identical to Exhibit 14 in
that faster TFP growth steepens the required investment line (increases the
slope), which intersects with the available saving/investment curve at lower
capital-to-labor and investment per worker ratios.


=== PAGE 136 ===


130 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Exhibit 14: Impact on the Steady State: Increase in Labor Force Growth
Output per Worker
Investment per Worker
[δ + n + θ/(1 – α)]k
2
[δ + n + θ/(1 – α)]k
1
s f(k)
1
(Y/L)
A
A
(Y/L)
B
B
(K/L) (K/L) Capital per
B A
Worker
In sum, such factors as the saving rate, the growth rate of the labor force, and the
depreciation rate change the level of output per worker but do not permanently
change the growth rate of output per worker. A permanent increase in the growth rate
in output per worker can occur only if there is a change in the growth rate of TFP.
So far we have focused on the steady-state growth path. What happens if the econ-
omy has not yet reached the steady state? During the transition to the steady-state
growth path, the economy can experience either faster or slower growth relative to
the steady state. Using Equations 6, 7, and 9, we can write the growth rates of output
per capita and the capital-to-labor ratio as, respectively,
_Δy _θ _Y _θ
y = ( 1 − α ) + αs ( K − Ψ ) = ( 1 − α ) + αs (y / k − Ψ) (10)
and
_Δk _θ _Y _θ
= + s − Ψ = + s (y / k − Ψ) , (11)
k (1 − α) (K ) (1 − α)
where the second equality in each line follows from the definitions of y and k,
which imply (Y/K) = y/k. These relationships are shown in Exhibit 15.


=== PAGE 137 ===


Implications of Neoclassical Model 131
Exhibit 15: Dynamics in the Neoclassical Model
Growth Rate of Output/Capita
Growth Rate of Capital/Labor
Δk/k
Y/K Declining
Δy/y
Steady State Growth Rate
Y/K Rising
Ψ Output/Capital
If the output-to-capital ratio is above its equilibrium level (ψ), the second term in
Equations 10 and 11 is positive and the growth rates of output per capita and the
capital-to-labor ratio are above the steady-state rate θ/(1 − α). This corresponds
to a situation in which actual saving/investment exceeds required investment and
above-trend growth in per capita output is driven by an above-trend rate of capital
deepening. This situation usually reflects a relatively low capital-to-labor ratio but
could, at least in principle, arise from high TFP. Because α < 1, capital is growing faster
than output and the output-to-capital ratio is falling. Over time, the growth rates of
both output per capita and the capital-to-labor ratio decline to the steady-state rate.
Of course, the converse is true if the output-to-capital ratio is below its steady-state
level. Actual investment is insufficient to sustain the trend rate of growth in the
capital-to-labor ratio, and both output per capita and the capital-to-labor ratio grow
more slowly. This situation usually corresponds to a relatively high and unsustainable
capital-to-labor ratio, but it could reflect relatively low TFP and hence relatively low
output. Over time, output grows faster than capital, the output-to-capital ratio rises,
and growth converges to the trend rate.
IMPLICATIONS OF NEOCLASSICAL MODEL 11
There are four major groups of conclusions from the neoclassical model:
1. Capital Accumulation
a. Capital accumulation affects the level of output but not the growth rate
in the long run.
b. Regardless of its initial capital-to-labor ratio or initial level of productiv-
ity, a growing economy will move to a point of steady-state growth.
c. In a steady state, the growth rate of output equals the rate of labor
force growth plus the rate of growth in TFP scaled by labor’s share of
income [n + θ/(1 − α)]. The growth rate of output does not depend on
the accumulation of capital or the rate of business investment. Those
familiar with the “labor-augmenting” technical change formulation of


=== PAGE 138 ===


132 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
the neoclassical model should note that in that formulation, the rate
of labor-augmenting technical change is also the growth rate of labor
productivity. In our formulation, the growth rate of labor productivity is
θ/(1 − α). So both formulations imply that long-run growth equals the
growth rate of the labor supply (n) plus a constant growth rate of labor
productivity.
2. Capital Deepening vs. Technology
a. Rapid growth that is above the steady-state rate of growth occurs when
countries first begin to accumulate capital; but growth will slow as the
process of accumulation continues (see Exhibit 16).
b. Long-term sustainable growth cannot rely solely on capital deepening
investment—that is, on increasing the stock of capital relative to labor.
If the capital-to-labor ratio grows too rapidly (i.e., faster than labor
productivity), capital becomes less productive, resulting in slower rather
than faster growth.
c. More generally, increasing the supply of some input(s) too rapidly rela-
tive to other inputs will lead to diminishing marginal returns and cannot
be the basis for sustainable growth.
d. In the absence of improvements in TFP, the growth of labor productivity
and per capita output would eventually slow.
e. Because of diminishing marginal returns to capital, the only way to sus-
tain growth in potential GDP per capita is through technological change
or growth in total factor productivity. This results in an upward shift in
the production function—the economy produces more goods and ser-
vices for any given mix of labor and capital inputs.
3. Convergence
a. Given the relative scarcity and hence high marginal productivity of
capital and potentially higher saving rates in developing countries, the
growth rates of developing countries should exceed those of developed
countries.
b. As a result, there should be a convergence of per capita incomes
between developed and developing countries over time.
4. Effect of Savings on Growth
a. The initial impact of a higher saving rate is to temporarily raise the rate
of growth in the economy. Mathematically, this can be seen as follows:
Equation 9 indicates that an increase in the saving rate (s) reduces the
steady-state output-to-capital ratio (ψ). This makes the last term in
Equations 10 and 11 positive, raising the growth rates of output per
capita (y) and the capital-to-labor ratio (k) above the steady-state rate.
In response to the higher saving rate, growth exceeds the steady-state
growth rate during a transition period. However, the economy returns to
the balanced growth path after the transition period.
b. During the transition period, the economy moves to a higher level of per
capita output and productivity.


=== PAGE 139 ===


Implications of Neoclassical Model 133
c. Once an economy achieves steady-state growth, the growth rate does
not depend on the percentage of income saved or invested. Higher sav-
ings cannot permanently raise the growth rate of output.
d. Countries with higher saving rates, however, will have a higher level of
per capita output, a higher capital-to-labor ratio, and a higher level of
labor productivity.
EXAMPLE 11
Comparative Statics and Transitional Growth in the
Neoclassical Model
Beginning in steady-state equilibrium, an economy’s saving rate suddenly
increases from 20% of income to 30% of income. Other key parameters describing
the economy are as follows:
Growth rate of TFP (θ) = 0.02
Income share of capital (α) = 0.35
Depreciation rate (δ) = 0.10
Labor force growth rate (n) = 0.01
The following table shows the output-to-capital ratio that will prevail in this
economy at various points in time after the increase in the saving rate.
Years after Saving Rate Increase Output-to-Capital Ratio
5 0.5947
10 0.5415
25 0.4857
50 0.4708
100 0.4693
New steady state ??
By rearranging the Cobb–Douglas production function (Equation 3), the
proportional impact of the saving rate change on the capital-to-labor ratio can
be expressed in terms of the proportional impact on the output-to-capital ratio.
The proportional impact on per capita income can then be determined from
the production function (Equation 3). Labeling the paths with and without the
change in saving rate as “new” and “old” respectively, at each date we have:a
_1
⎡ Y ⎤α−1
_ k n ew = ⎢_ ( ⧸K) new ⎥
k Y
old
⎣( ⧸K) ⎦
old
and
α
_ y y n o e ld w = ( _ k k n o e ld w ) .
1. Using Equations 8 and 9, calculate the steady-state growth rate of per capita
income and the steady-state output-to-capital ratio both before and after


=== PAGE 140 ===


134 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
the change in the saving rate. What happens to the capital-to-labor ratio and
output per capita?
Solution
From Equation 8, the steady-state growth rate of per capita income, both
before and after the increase in the saving rate, is ∆y/y = θ/(1 − α) = 0.02/(1
− 0.35) = 0.0308, or 3.08%. From Equation 9, the steady-state output-to-cap-
ital ratio is
_Y _1 _θ
K = ( s ) [ ( 1 − α ) + δ + n ] ≡ Ψ .
Using the parameter values given, θ/(1 − α) + δ + n = 0.0308 + 0.10 + 0.01 =
0.1408, so the steady-state output-to-capital ratio is 0.1408/0.2 = 0.7040 with
the initial 20% saving rate and 0.1408/0.30 = 0.4693 with the new 30% saving
rate. As shown in Exhibit 14, both the capital-to-labor ratio and output per
worker are at higher levels in the new steady state. But once the new steady
state is achieved, they do not grow any faster than they did in the steady
state with the lower saving rate.
2. Use the output-to-capital ratios given in the preceding table along with
Equation 10 and your answers to Question 1 to determine the growth rate of
per capita income that will prevail immediately following the change in the
saving rate and at each of the indicated times after the change. Explain the
pattern of growth rates.
Solution
According to Equation 10, the growth rate of per capita income is given by
_Δy _θ
y = ( 1 − α ) + αs (y / k − Ψ) .
Immediately following the increase in the saving rate, the relevant value of
ψ becomes the new steady-state output-to-capital ratio (0.4693). The actual
output-to-capital ratio does not change immediately, so y/k is initially still
0.7040. Plugging these values into the foregoing growth equation gives the
growth rate of per capita income:
∆y/y = 0.0308 + (0.35)(0.30)(0.7040 − 0.4693) = 0.0554, or 5.54%
Similar calculations using the output-to-capital ratios in the preceding table
give the following:
Years after Saving Growth Rate of Per Capita
Rate Increase Output-to-Capital Ratio Income (%)
0 0.7040 5.54
5 0.5947 4.39
10 0.5415 3.84
25 0.4857 3.25
50 0.4708 3.09
100 0.4693 3.08
New steady state 0.4693 3.08
The growth rate “jumps” from the steady-state rate of 3.08% to 5.54% when
the saving rate increases because the increase in saving/investment re-
sults in more rapid capital accumulation. Over time, the growth rate slows
because the marginal productivity of capital declines as the capital-to-labor


=== PAGE 141 ===


Implications of Neoclassical Model 135
ratio increases. In addition, as the capital-to-labor ratio increases and the
output-to-capital ratio declines, a greater portion of savings is required to
maintain the capital-to-labor ratio, leaving a smaller portion for continued
capital deepening. Roughly two-thirds of the growth acceleration has dissi-
pated after 10 years.
3. Using the output-to-capital ratios given in the preceding table, calculate the
proportional impact of the increased saving rate on the capital-to-labor ratio
and on per capita income over time. With respect to these variables, how
will the new steady state compare with the old steady state?
Solution
Using the output-to-capital ratio that will prevail five years after the saving
rate increase, the proportional impact on the capital-to-labor ratio and on
per capita income will be
_1
⎡ Y ⎤α−1
_ k n ew = ⎢_ ( ⧸ K ) new ⎥ = _0.5947 _ 0 − .6 1 5 = 1.2964
k Y [0.7040]
old
⎣( ⧸K) ⎦
old
and
α
_ y y n o e ld w = ( _ k k n o e ld w ) = 1.2964 0.35 = 1.0951
Thus, after five years, the capital-to-labor ratio will be 29.64% higher than
it would have been without the increase in the saving rate, and per capita
income will be 9.51% higher. Similar calculations for the other periods give
the following:
Proportionate Increase (%) in:
Years after Saving
Rate Increase Capital-to-Labor Ratio Per Capita Income
0 0.00 0.00
5 29.64 9.51
10 49.74 15.18
25 77.01 22.12
50 85.71 24.19
100 86.68 24.42
New steady state 86.68 24.42
In the new steady state, the capital-to-labor ratio will be 86.68% higher at
every point in time than it would have been in the old steady state. Per capi-
ta income will be 24.42% higher at every point in time. Both variables will be
growing at the same rate (3.08%) as they would have been in the old steady
state.
a Note that the output-to-capital ratio would have been constant on the
original steady state path. Because of the impact of total factor productivity, the
capital-to-labor ratio and output per capita are not constant even in steady state.
In comparing “paths” for these variables, we isolate the impact of the saving rate
change by canceling out the effect of TFP growth. Mathematically, we cancel
out A in Equation 3 to produce the equations shown here.


=== PAGE 142 ===


136 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
12 EXTENSION OF NEOCLASSICAL MODEL
Solow (1957) used the growth accounting equation to determine the contributions of
each factor to economic growth in the United States for the period 1909–1949. He
reached the surprising conclusion that more than 80% of the per capita growth in the
United States resulted from TFP. Denison (1985) authored another study examining
US growth for the period 1929–1982 using the Solow framework. His findings were
similar to Solow’s, with TFP explaining nearly 70% of US growth. The problem with
these findings is that the neoclassical model provides no explicit explanation of the
economic determinants of technological progress or how TFP changes over time.
Because technology is determined outside the model (i.e., exogenously), critics argue
that the neoclassical model ignores the very factor driving growth in the economy.
Technology is simply the residual or the part of growth that cannot be explained by
other inputs, such as capital and labor. This lack of an explanation for technology led
to growing dissatisfaction with the neoclassical model.
The other source of criticism of the neoclassical model is the prediction that the
steady-state rate of economic growth is unrelated to the rate of saving and investment.
Long-run growth of output in the Solow model depends only on the rates of growth
of the labor force and technology. Higher rates of investment and savings have only a
transitory impact on growth. Thus, an increase in investment as a share of GDP from
10% to 15% of GDP will have a positive impact on the near-term growth rate but will
not have a permanent impact on the ultimately sustainable percentage growth rate.
This conclusion makes many economists uncomfortable. Mankiw (1995) provided
evidence rebutting this hypothesis and showed that saving rates and growth rates
are positively correlated across countries. Finally, the neoclassical model predicts
that in an economy where the stock of capital is rising faster than labor productivity,
the return to investment should decline with time. For the advanced countries, the
evidence does not support this argument because returns have not fallen over time.
Critiques of the neoclassical model led to two lines of subsequent research on
economic growth. The first approach, originated by Jorgenson (1966, 2000), is termed
the augmented Solow approach. It remains in the neoclassical tradition in that dimin-
ishing marginal returns are critical and there is no explanation for the determinants
of technological progress. Instead, this approach attempts to reduce empirically the
portion of growth attributed to the unexplained residual labeled technological progress
(TFP). The idea is to develop better measures of the inputs used in the production
function and broaden the definition of investment by including human capital, research
and development, and public infrastructure. In addition, the composition of capital
spending is important. Higher levels of capital spending on high-technology goods
will boost productivity more than spending on machine tools or structures.
By adding inputs such as human capital to the production function, the augmented
Solow model enables us to more accurately measure the contribution of technological
progress to growth. The economy still moves toward a steady-state growth path, how-
ever, because even broadly defined capital is assumed to eventually encounter dimin-
ishing marginal returns. In essence, this line of research uses the growth accounting
methodology and increases the number of inputs in the production function in order
to provide a more accurate measure of technological progress. The second approach
is the endogenous growth theory, which we examine in the next section.


=== PAGE 143 ===


Endogenous Growth Model 137
ENDOGENOUS GROWTH MODEL 13
The alternative to the neoclassical model is a series of models known as endogenous
growth theory. These models focus on explaining technological progress rather than
treating it as exogenous. In these models, self-sustaining growth emerges as a nat-
ural consequence of the model and the economy does not necessarily converge to a
steady-state rate of growth. Unlike the neoclassical model, there are no diminishing
marginal returns to capital for the economy as a whole in the endogenous growth
models. So increasing the saving rate permanently increases the rate of economic
growth. These models also allow for the possibility of increasing returns to scale.
Romer (1986) provided a model of technological progress and a rationale for why
capital does not experience diminishing marginal returns. He argued that capital
accumulation is the main factor accounting for long-run growth, once the definition
of capital is broadened to include such items as human or knowledge capital and
research and development (R&D). R&D is defined as investment in new knowledge
that improves the production process. In endogenous growth theory, knowledge or
human capital and R&D spending are factors of production, like capital and labor,
and have to be paid for through savings.
Companies spend on R&D for the same reason they invest in new equipment
and build new factories: to make a profit. R&D spending is successful if it leads to
the development of a new product or method of production that is successful in the
marketplace. There is a fundamental difference, however, between spending on new
equipment and factories and spending on R&D. The final product of R&D spending
is ideas. These ideas can potentially be copied and used by other companies in the
economy. Thus, R&D expenditures have potentially large positive externalities or
spillover effects. This means that spending by one company has a positive impact on
other companies and increases the overall pool of knowledge available to all compa-
nies. Spending by companies on R&D and knowledge capital generates benefits to the
economy as a whole that exceed the private benefit to the individual company making
the R&D investment. Individual companies cannot fully capture all the benefits asso-
ciated with creating new ideas and methods of production. Some of the benefits are
external to the company, and so are the social returns associated with the investment
in R&D and human capital.
This distinction between the private and social returns or benefits to capital is
important because it solves an important microeconomic issue. The elimination of
the assumption of diminishing marginal returns to capital implies constant returns
to capital and increasing returns to all factors taken together. If individual companies
could capture these scale economies, then all industries would eventually be dominated
by a single company—a monopoly. There is simply no empirical evidence to support
this implication. Separating private returns from social returns solves the problem.
If companies face constant returns to scale for all private factors, there is no longer
an inherent advantage for a company being large. But the externality or social benefit
results in increasing returns to scale across the entire economy as companies benefit
from the private spending of the other companies.
The role of R&D spending and the positive externalities associated with this
spending have important implications for economic growth. In the endogenous
growth model, the economy does not reach a steady growth rate equal to the growth
of labor plus an exogenous rate of labor productivity growth. Instead, saving and
investment decisions can generate self-sustaining growth at a permanently higher
rate. This situation is in sharp contrast to the neoclassical model, in which only a
transitory increase in growth above the steady state is possible. The reason for this


=== PAGE 144 ===


138 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
difference is that because of the externalities on R&D, diminishing marginal returns
to capital do not set in. The production function in the endogenous growth model is
a straight line given by
y = f(k ) = ck , (12)
e e e
where output per worker (y ) is proportional to the stock of capital per worker
e
(k ), c is the (constant) marginal product of capital in the aggregate economy, and
e
the subscript e denotes the endogenous growth model. In contrast, the neoclassical
production function is a curved line that eventually flattens out (see Exhibit 4).
To understand the significance of introducing constant returns to aggregate capital
accumulation, note that in this model the output-to-capital ratio is fixed (= c) and
therefore output per worker (y ) always grows at the same rate as capital per worker
e
(k ). Thus, faster or slower capital accumulation translates one for one into faster or
e
slower growth in output per capita. Substituting Equation 12 into Equation 7 gives an
equation for the growth rate of output per capita in the endogenous growth model:
∆y /y = ∆k /k = sc − δ − n
e e e e
Because all the terms on the right-hand side of this equation are constant, this is
both the long-run and the short-run growth rate in this model. Examination of the
equation shows that a higher saving rate (s) implies a permanently higher growth rate.
This is the key result of the endogenous growth model.
The positive externalities associated with spending on R&D and knowledge capital
suggest that spending by private companies on these inputs may be too low from an
overall societal point of view. This is an example of a market failure wherein private
companies under-invest in the production of these goods. In this case, there may be a
role for government intervention to correct for the market failure by direct government
spending on R&D and/or providing tax breaks and subsidies for private production
of knowledge capital. Higher levels of spending on knowledge capital could translate
into faster economic growth even in the long run. Finally, according to the endoge-
nous growth theory, there is no reason why the incomes of developed and developing
countries should converge. Because of constant or even increasing returns associated
with investment in knowledge capital, the developed countries can continue to grow
as fast as, or faster than, the developing countries. As a result, there is no reason to
expect convergence of income over time. We now turn to the convergence debate in
more detail.
EXAMPLE 12
Neoclassical vs. Endogenous Growth Models
Consider again an economy with per capita income growing at a constant 3.08%
rate and with a 20% saving rate, an output-to-capital ratio (c in the endogenous
growth model, Equation 12) of 0.7040, a depreciation rate (δ) of 10%, and a 1%
labor force growth (n).
1. Use the endogenous growth model to calculate the new steady-state growth
rate of per capita income if the saving rate increases to 23.5%.
Solution
In the endogenous growth model, the new growth rate of per capita income
is
∆y /y = sc − δ − n = (0.235)(0.7040) − 0.10 − 0.01 = 0.0554, or 5.54%.
e e
This is the same as the growth rate immediately following the increase in the
saving rate (to 30% in that case) in the earlier example using the neoclassical


=== PAGE 145 ===


Convergence Hypotheses 139
model (Example 11). Unlike in the neoclassical model, in the endogenous
growth model this higher growth rate will be sustained.
2. How much higher will per capita income be in 10 years because of the
higher saving rate? How does this compare with the impact calculated in
Example 11 using the neoclassical model? What accounts for the difference?
Solution
According to the endogenous growth model, per capita income will grow
2.46% (= 5.54% − 3.08%) faster with the higher saving rate. After 10 years,
the cumulative impact of the faster growth rate will be
exp(0.0246 × 10) = exp(0.246) = 1.2789.
So, per capita income will be almost 28% higher than it would have been at
the lower saving rate. This increase is substantially larger than the 15.18%
cumulative increase after 10 years found in Example 11 assuming a much
larger increase in the saving rate (to 30% instead of 23.5%) in the neoclas-
sical model. The difference arises because the endogenous growth model
assumes that capital accumulation is not subject to diminishing returns.
Therefore, the growth rate is permanently, rather than temporarily, higher.
3. In an effort to boost growth, the government is considering two proposals.
One would subsidize all private companies that increase their investment
spending. The second would subsidize only investments in R&D and/or
implementation of new technologies with potential for network externali-
ties. Interpret these proposals in terms of the neoclassical and endogenous
growth models and assess their likely impact on growth. (Focus only on
“supply-side” considerations here.)
Solution
Subsidizing all private investment would tend to have a significant, pure
capital deepening component. That is, companies would be encouraged to
buy more, but not necessarily better, plant and equipment. The neoclassical
model indicates that this scenario is likely to result in a temporary surge in
growth, but even if the higher rate of investment/saving is sustained, growth
will again decline over time. On the positive side, this proposal is very likely
to succeed, at least for a while, because it does not require investment in
unproven technologies or ill-defined network effects. The impact of the
other proposal is more uncertain but potentially much more powerful. If
the investments in R&D and/or new technologies lead to new knowledge,
greater efficiency, new products and methods, and/or network externali-
ties, then the endogenous growth model suggests that growth is likely to be
permanently enhanced.
CONVERGENCE HYPOTHESES 14
explain and evaluate convergence hypotheses


=== PAGE 146 ===


140 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
As is evident in Exhibit 1, a wide gap separates the living standards in developed and
developing nations. The question is, will this difference persist forever or will the per
capita income levels of the developing countries converge to those of the developed
countries? Convergence means that countries with low per capita incomes should grow
at a faster rate than countries with high per capita incomes. Thus, over time the per
capita income of developing countries should converge toward that of the developed
countries. Whether convergence occurs has major implications for the future growth
prospects of developed versus developing countries. It also has important investment
implications.
There are three types of convergence commonly discussed in the economics lit-
erature: absolute, conditional, and club convergence. Absolute convergence means
that developing countries, regardless of their particular characteristics, will eventually
catch up with the developed countries and match them in per capita output. The
neoclassical model assumes that all countries have access to the same technology. As
a result, per capita income in all countries should eventually grow at the same rate.
Thus, the model implies convergence of per capita growth rates among all countries.
It does not, however, imply that the level of per capita income will be the same in all
countries regardless of underlying characteristics; that is, it does not imply absolute
convergence.
Conditional convergence means that convergence is conditional on the countries
having the same saving rate, population growth rate, and production function. If these
conditions hold, the neoclassical model implies convergence to the same level of per
capita output as well as the same steady-state growth rate. In terms of Exhibit 13,
these economies would have the same k* and thus the same steady state. If they start
with different capital-to-labor ratios, their growth rates will differ in the transition to
the steady state. The economy with a lower capital-to-labor ratio will experience more
rapid growth of productivity and per capita income, but the differential will diminish
until they finally converge. Countries with different saving rates or population growth
rates and thus different steady-state values for k* will have different steady-state levels
of per capita income, but their growth rates of per capita output will still converge.
The data (see Exhibit 17) indicate that some of the poorer countries are diverging
rather than converging to the income levels of the developed countries. Thus, we
have the notion of club convergence, where only rich and middle-income countries
that are members of the club are converging to the income level of the world’s richest
countries. This means that the countries with the lowest per capita income in the club
grow at the fastest rate. In contrast, countries outside the club continue to fall behind.
Poor countries can join the club if they make appropriate institutional changes, such
as those summarized earlier in our discussion of factors limiting growth in developing
economies. Finally, countries may fall into a non-convergence trap if they do not
implement necessary institutional reforms. For example, failure to reform labor mar-
kets has undermined growth in some European countries that have experienced weak
growth in employment and high rates of unemployment over the last two decades.
Certain institutional arrangements that initially enhance growth may later generate
non-convergence traps if maintained too long. Import substitution policies enabled
the Latin American countries to grow rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s but caused them
to stagnate in the 1970s and 1980s.
If convergence, and especially club convergence, does occur, investing in coun-
tries with lower per capita incomes that are members of the club should, over long
periods, provide a higher rate of return than investing in higher-income countries.
Convergence means that the rate of growth of potential GDP should be higher in
developing countries that have made the institutional changes that are a precondition
for growth and that enable these countries to become members of the convergence
club. With higher long-term growth in these economies, corporate profits should also
grow at a faster rate. Given the faster rate of growth in earnings, stock prices may


=== PAGE 147 ===


Convergence Hypotheses 141
also rise at a faster rate. Of course, risk is also likely to be higher in these markets.
Nonetheless, it is reasonable to conclude that long-term investors should allocate a
risk-tolerance-appropriate portion of their assets to those developing economies that
have become members of the convergence club.
Convergence between the developed and developing countries can occur in two
ways. First, convergence takes place through capital accumulation and capital deepen-
ing. Exhibit 16 illustrates the difference between developed and developing countries
using the per capita neoclassical production function. The developed countries operate
at point B, so increases in capital have almost no impact on productivity. In contrast,
developing countries operate at point A, where increases in capital significantly boost
labor productivity.
Exhibit 16: Per Capita Production Function Developed vs. Developing
Countries
Output per Worker
B
(Y/L) f(k)
B
(Y/L)
A A
Developing Developed Capital per
Country, k A Country, k B Worker
A second source of convergence is that developing countries can imitate or adopt
technology already widely utilized in the advanced countries. Developing countries
can learn from advanced countries as scientific and management practices spread
with globalization. By importing technology from the advanced countries, the devel-
oping countries can achieve faster economic growth and converge to the income of
the advanced countries. Technology transfers will narrow the income gap between
developed and developing countries only if the poor countries invest the resources
to master the technology and apply it to their economies. This spending is similar to
R&D spending and allows the country to join the convergence club. The steady-state
rate of growth for members of the convergence club will be determined by the global
rate of technological progress. Without such spending, the country will be left out
and will continue to fall behind the developed countries.
In contrast to the neoclassical model, the endogenous growth model makes no
prediction that convergence should occur. This model allows for countries that start
with high per capita income and more capital to grow faster and stay ahead of the
developing countries. If the externalities associated with knowledge and human cap-
ital are large, the higher-income country can maintain its lead through high rates of
investment in these capital inputs.


=== PAGE 148 ===


142 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
If the convergence hypothesis is correct, there should be an inverse relation between
the initial level of per capita real GDP and the growth rate in per capita GDP. Exhibit
17 shows the countries in Exhibit 1 in descending order of per capita income in 1950.
If incomes are converging across countries, the poor countries in 1950 should have a
higher growth rate between 1950 and 2018 than the rich countries.
Exhibit 17: Real Per Capita GDP by Selected Economy
Real GDP Per Capita (in US dollars) Avg. Annual Growth in Per Capita GDP (%)
1950 1980 2000 2018 1950–80 1980–2000 2000–18 1950–2018
United States 14,559 29,136 45,640 55,650 2.3 2.3 1.1 2.0
New Zealand 13,795 20,526 27,514 35,676 1.3 1.5 1.5 1.4
Australia 13,219 24,403 36,469 46,555 2.1 2.0 1.4 1.9
Canada 12,053 27,356 37,555 44,135 2.8 1.6 0.9 1.9
United Kingdom 11,602 20,547 33,531 40,627 1.9 2.5 1.1 1.9
France 8,266 24,901 35,778 40,689 3.7 1.8 0.7 2.4
Venezuela 8,104 18,247 14,469 9,487 2.7 −1.2 −2.3 0.2
Argentina 6,164 14,710 15,011 18,255 2.9 0.1 1.1 1.6
Italy 5,954 24,937 36,085 35,233 4.9 1.9 −0.1 2.6
Ireland 5,496 16,707 39,345 70,032 3.8 4.4 3.3 3.8
South Africa 4,361 10,781 9,715 12,156 3.1 −0.5 1.3 1.5
Singapore 4,299 20,626 51,748 89,196 5.4 4.7 3.1 4.6
Mexico 4,180 13,546 15,811 18,313 4.0 0.8 0.8 2.2
Spain 3,964 18,353 30,347 35,679 5.2 2.5 0.9 3.3
Peru 3,464 7,314 6,498 12,644 2.5 −0.6 3.8 1.9
Japan 3,048 20,769 33,875 39,313 6.6 2.5 0.8 3.8
Brazil 2,365 11,372 11,470 14,360 5.4 0.0 1.3 2.7
Turkey 2,327 7,990 13,258 24,850 4.2 2.6 3.6 3.5
Philippines 1,296 4,390 4,277 7,943 4.2 −0.1 3.5 2.7
Korea 1,185 5,084 20,757 36,756 5.0 7.3 3.2 5.2
Egypt 1,132 5,228 8,452 11,881 5.2 2.4 1.9 3.5
Indonesia 804 2,911 5,863 11,760 4.4 3.6 3.9 4.0
Pakistan 666 2,080 3,406 5,049 3.9 2.5 2.2 3.0
India 658 1,297 2,546 6,999 2.3 3.4 5.8 3.5
China 402 722 3,682 16,098 2.0 8.5 8.5 5.6
Ethiopia 314 727 653 2,073 2.8 −0.5 6.6 2.8
Note: GDP per capita, constant prices at 2011 in US dollars, adjusted for PPP.
Source: IMF.
The results for the convergence hypothesis are mixed. The economies with the highest
per capita income in 1950 were the United States, New Zealand, Australia, and Canada.
The markets with the fastest growth rate over the period 1950–2018 were China and
Korea, each growing at a rate above 5%. This result strongly supports convergence
because the per capita incomes of these economies in 1950 were well below that of the
United States. In addition, the results for Japan, Singapore, Spain, and Korea showed
a convergence to the level of income in the advanced economies. In total, 17 of the
27 economies in our sample grew faster than the United States during the period.


=== PAGE 149 ===


Growth in an Open Economy 143
However, South Africa, Argentina, Venezuela, and New Zealand were among those
that fell further behind the United States. Interestingly, since 2000, convergence has
been relatively strong overall, with 16 countries in our sample (60%) growing faster
than the United States—including Ethiopia, the Philippines, Peru, Turkey, South Africa,
Australia, and New Zealand—but has not continued among the most advanced econ-
omies: France, Japan, and Italy all lagged the United States, Canada, and Australia.
The evidence seems to suggest that poorer countries may converge if they develop
the appropriate legal, political, and economic institutions. In addition, trade policy is
an important factor, which we address in the next section.
GROWTH IN AN OPEN ECONOMY 15
describe the economic rationale for governments to provide
incentives to private investment in technology and knowledge
describe the expected impact of removing trade barriers on capital
investment and profits, employment and wages, and growth in the
economies involved
The Solow model discussed earlier assumed a closed economy in which domestic
investment equals domestic savings and there is no international trade or capital
flows. Opening up the economy to trade and financial flows can significantly affect
the rate of growth in an economy for the following reasons:
1. A country can borrow or lend funds in global markets, and domestic invest-
ment can be funded by global savings. Thus, investment is not constrained
by domestic savings.
2. Countries can shift resources into industries in which they have a compara-
tive advantage and away from industries in which they are relatively ineffi-
cient, thereby increasing overall productivity.
3. Companies have access to a larger, global market for their products, allow-
ing them to better exploit any economies of scale and increasing the poten-
tial reward for successful innovation.
4. Countries can import technology, thus increasing the rate of technological
progress.
5. Global trade increases competition in the domestic market, forcing com-
panies to produce better products, improve productivity, and keep costs low.
According to the neoclassical model, convergence should occur more quickly if
economies are open and there is free trade and international borrowing and lending.
Opening up the economy should increase the rate at which countries’ capital-to-labor
ratios converge. The dynamic adjustment process can be described as follows:
1. Developing countries have less capital per worker, and as a result, the mar-
ginal product of capital is higher. Thus, the rate of return on investments
should be higher in countries with low capital-to-labor ratios and lower in
countries with high capital-to-labor ratios.
2. Global savers, seeking higher returns on investments, will invest in the cap-
ital-poor countries. In an open economy, capital should flow from countries
with high capital-to-labor ratios to those that are capital poor.


=== PAGE 150 ===


144 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
3. Because of the capital inflows, the physical capital stock in the developing
countries should grow more rapidly than in rich countries even if the saving
rate is low in the poorer countries. Faster capital growth will result in higher
productivity growth, causing per capita incomes to converge.
4. Because capital flows must be matched by offsetting trade flows, capi-
tal-poor countries will tend to run a trade deficit as they borrow globally to
finance domestic investment. In contrast, the developed countries will tend
to run trade surpluses as they export capital.
5. During the transition to the new steady state, the inflows of capital will
temporarily raise the rate of growth in the capital-poor country above the
steady-state rate of growth. At the same time, growth in the capital-export-
ing countries will be below the steady state.
6. Over time, the physical capital stock will rise in the capital-poor country,
reducing the return on investments. As a result, the rate of investment
and size of the country’s trade deficit will decline. Growth will slow and
approach the steady-state rate of growth. If investment falls below the level
of domestic savings, the country will eventually shift from a trade deficit to a
trade surplus and become an exporter of capital.
7. In the Solow model, after the reallocation of world savings, there is no per-
manent increase in the rate of growth in an economy. Both the developed
and developing countries grow at the steady-state rate of growth.
In contrast to the neoclassical model, endogenous growth models predict that a
more open trade policy will permanently raise the rate of economic growth. In these
models, international trade increases global output through the following:
1. A selection effect, whereby increased competition from foreign companies
forces less efficient domestic companies to exit and more efficient ones to
innovate and raises the efficiency of the overall national economy.
2. A scale effect that allows producers to more fully exploit economies of scale
by selling to a larger market.
3. A backwardness effect arising from less advanced countries or sectors of an
economy catching up with the more advanced countries or sectors through
knowledge spillovers.
Open trade also affects the innovation process by encouraging higher levels of
spending on R&D and on human capital as companies invest to take advantage of access
to larger markets and the greater flow of ideas and knowledge among countries. The
rate of return to new investment increases, as does the rate of economic growth. In
general, most countries gain from open trade, with the scale effect benefiting smaller
countries and the backwardness effect benefiting the poorer, less developed countries.
But trade can also retard growth in some cases, especially in small countries that lag
behind the technology leaders. Opening these countries to trade may discourage
domestic innovation because companies will recognize that, even if they innovate,
they may lose out to more efficient foreign companies.
EXAMPLE 13
The Entry of China and India into the Global Economy
China and India effectively entered the global economy in the 1980s as they
shifted toward more market-oriented policies and opened up to global trade. Their
impact on global growth was significant. In 2018, according to the IMF, China
and India accounted for 20% and 8% of world GDP (based on PPP), respectively,
whereas the two countries combined for only 4.2% of global output in 1980. The


=== PAGE 151 ===


Growth in an Open Economy 145
entry of these two countries significantly increased the global supply of skilled
and unskilled labor receiving relatively lower wages. As a result of the surge in
available labor, global potential GDP increased sharply. Economic theory sug-
gests that the supply-side increase in the global capacity to produce goods and
services would increase global output and put downward pressure on prices.
The neoclassical model of growth can provide us with some further insights
into the impact of China and India entering the global economy. At the time,
China and India had relatively lower wages and capital compared with the United
States and Europe. One would expect that the rate of return on capital would
be higher in China and India and that capital would flow from the developed
countries to China and India. Hence, both China and India would be expected
to run trade deficits. This has been the case for India but, contrary to the model’s
prediction, China has run trade surpluses. These surpluses stem mainly from
China’s very high domestic saving rate.
Nonetheless, China has experienced large foreign direct investment (see
Exhibit 18) inflows, which have reinforced its already high private investment
rate. As China and India accumulate capital, their capital-to-labor ratios, real
wage levels, and per capita income should converge toward those of the advanced
economies. Depending on global aggregate demand conditions, wages might
even have to fall in the developed countries in the process of shifting wealth and
income to the developing economies. Because of the surge in the global supply
of labor, the overall share of labor in global income should decline relative to
capital. In addition, global productivity should rise as China and India account
for a rising share of global output. In sum, over the long run, the growing share
of global GDP going to China and India will benefit the global economy as more
efficient utilization of resources allows global potential GDP to grow more rapidly
for an extended period.
Although both the neoclassical and the endogenous models of growth show the
benefits of open markets, over the last 50 years developing countries have pursued
two contrasting strategies for economic development:
■ Inward-oriented policies attempt to develop domestic industries by restrict-
ing imports. Instead of importing goods and services, these policies encour-
age the production of domestic substitutes, despite the fact that it may
be more costly to do so. These policies are also called import substitution
policies.
■ Outward-oriented policies attempt to integrate domestic industries with
those of the global economy through trade and make exports a key driver of
growth.
Many African and Latin American countries pursued inward-oriented policies
from the 1950s to the 1980s that resulted in poor GDP growth and inefficient indus-
tries producing low-quality goods. In contrast, many East Asian countries, such as
Singapore and South Korea, pursued outward-oriented polices during this same
period, which resulted in high rates of GDP growth and convergence with developed
countries. These countries also benefited from the positive effects of foreign direct
investment, which suggests that more open and trade-oriented economies will grow
at a faster rate. The evidence strongly supports this case.
In Example 1, we compared the economic performance of Argentina and Venezuela
with that of Japan, South Korea, and Singapore. In 1950, the per capita GDP of the two
Latin American countries was well above that of the three East Asian countries. By
2010, however, the per capita GDPs of the three Asian countries were well above those
of Argentina and Venezuela. The difference in the growth rates between Argentina


=== PAGE 152 ===


146 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
and Venezuela and the three Asian countries is explained largely by the openness of
their economies. Argentina and Venezuela were relatively closed economies, whereas
the Asian countries relied on foreign investment and open markets to fuel growth.
Many African and Latin American countries have removed trade barriers and
are pursuing more outward-oriented policies, and they experienced better growth.
Brazil is a good example. Exports of goods and services increased from $64.6 billion
in 2000 to $218 billion in 2018, an increase of more than 237%. As shown in Exhibit
18, exports as a share of GDP rose from 10.2% to 14.8% over this period.
Exhibit 18: Exports and Foreign Direct Investment of Selected Countries
1980 1990 2000 2018
Brazil
Exports as a percentage of 9.1% 8.2% 10.2% 14.8%
GDP
Inflows of foreign direct NA NA $32.8 $61.2
investment ($ billions)
China
Exports as a percentage of 5.9% 13.6% 20.9% 19.5%
GDP
Inflows of foreign direct NA NA $38.4 $203.5
investment ($ billions)
India
Exports as a percentage of 6.1% 7.1% 13.0% 19.7%
GDP
Inflows of foreign direct NA NA $3.6 $42.1
investment ($ billions)
Ireland
Exports as a percentage of 44.3% 54.6% 94.5% 122.3%
GDP
Inflows of foreign direct NA NA $25.8 $28.1
investment ($ billions)
Mexico
Exports as a percentage of 10.1% 18.7% 25.4% 39.2%
GDP
Inflows of foreign direct NA NA $18.0 $32.7
investment ($ billions)
South Africa
Exports as a percentage of 34.3% 23.5% 27.2% 30.1%
GDP
Inflows of foreign direct NA NA $0.9 $5.3
investment ($ billions)
South Korea
Exports as a percentage of 28.5% 25.3% 35.1% 44.0%
GDP
Inflows of foreign direct NA NA $9.3 $14.5
investment ($ billions)
United States


=== PAGE 153 ===


Growth in an Open Economy 147
1980 1990 2000 2018
Exports as a percentage of 9.8% 9.3% 10.7% 12.2%
GDP
Inflows of foreign direct NA NA $159.2 $268.4
investment ($ billions)
Source: OECD (2019).
EXAMPLE 14
Why Some Countries Converge and Others Do Not
As evident from the high rates of growth between 1950 and 2018 shown in
Exhibit 18, China and South Korea are converging toward the income levels
of the advanced economies. In contrast, the economies of Mexico and South
Africa have not converged.
1. Using the data in Exhibit 18, give some reasons why this has occurred.
Solution
Two reasons largely account for the difference. First, growth in the Chinese
and South Korean economies has been driven by high rates of business
investment. As shown in Exhibit 9, investment as a share of GDP in 2018
was 44% in China, almost double the rate of 23.0% in Mexico and more than
double the rate of 18% in South Africa. Although investment as a share of
GDP in South Korea is lower than in China, it is well above that of Mexico
and South Africa.
Second, both China and South Korea have pursued an aggressive ex-
port-driven, outward-oriented policy focusing on manufactured goods.
In 2018, exports were 44% of GDP for South Korea and 19.5% of GDP for
China (Exhibit 18). In addition, foreign direct investment is a major factor
underlying growth in China.
On the other hand, South Africa’s more inward-oriented economy attracted
only $5.3 billion in foreign direct investment in 2018, significantly less than
that of Ireland—a smaller but much wealthier and very open country—and
the $203 billion inflow of foreign investment into China. These trends are
changing, however, as many African and Latin American countries are
increasingly relying on growing exports and foreign investment to increase
GDP growth.
EXAMPLE 15
Investment Prospects in Spain: Estimating the Sustainable
Growth Rate
You are a financial analyst at Global Invest Inc., an investment management
firm that runs a number of global mutual funds with a significant exposure to
Spain. The IBEX 35 Index, which reached a crisis-induced low of 6,065 in May
2012, remains far below its October 2007 peak of almost 16,000. The members
of the investment policy committee at the firm believe the equity market in
Spain is attractive and is currently being depressed by temporary problems in
the banking and real estate markets of Spain, which they feel are overstated.


=== PAGE 154 ===


148 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
They believe that higher profits will ultimately drive the market higher but are
concerned about the long-term prospects and the sustainable rate of growth
for Spain. One of the research assistants at the firm gathers the data shown in
Exhibit 19 from the OECD and the Conference Board.
Exhibit 19: Growth Data for Spain
GDP in Bil- Gross Capital Consumption Labor Cost Output per Hour Growth in
lions of USD Spending as of Fixed Capi- as Percent- Total Hours Worked in 2011 Total Factor
Adjusted for Percentage of tal (percent of age of Total Worked USD Adjusted Productivity
PPP GDP GDP) Factor Cost (millions) for PPP (%)
2006 1,390 31.3 14.9 61.4 35,358 48 −0.5
2007 1,481 31.3 15.1 60.5 36,259 48 −0.4
2008 1,527 29.6 15.6 60.2 36,519 48 −1.6
2009 1,484 24.6 16.4 60.5 34,371 50 −1.7
2010 1,501 23.5 16.8 59.1 33,591 51 −0.1
2011 1,517 21.9 17.4 59.1 32,788 51 −0.8
2012 1,501 20.0 18.0 57.3 31,204 52 −1.2
2013 1,501 18.7 17.8 56.5 30,250 53 −1.0
2014 1,551 19.5 17.8 56.1 30,569 53 −0.3
2015 1,625 20.4 17.5 56.4 31,527 54 −0.9
Sources: OECD Stat Extracts and the Conference Board Total Economy Database.
According to the Conference Board website, the physical capital stock for
Spain was estimated at $1,808 billion (adjusted for purchasing power parity) in
2005. The research analyst calculated the physical capital stock (K) for Spain for
the years 2006–2015 using the following equation:
K = K + I − D,
t t−1
where I is gross investment or gross capital spending and D is the depreciation
or the consumption of fixed capital. So for 2006 and 2007, the physical capital
stock is calculated as follows:
K = $1,808 + $1,390 (0.313 − 0.149) = $2,036 billion
2006
K = $2,036 + $1,481 (0.313 − 0.151) = $2,276 billion
2007
The physical capital stock for the remaining years is calculated in the same
way and given by Exhibit 20.
Exhibit 20: Estimated Physical Capital Stock
(USD billions)
2006 $2,036
2007 2,276
2008 2,490
2009 2,611
2010 2,713
2011 2,782
2012 2,812
2013 2,826


=== PAGE 155 ===


Growth in an Open Economy 149
2014 2,851
2015 2,898
The investment policy committee asks you to use the preceding data to
address the following:
1. Calculate the potential growth rate of the Spanish economy using the pro-
duction function or growth accounting method (Equation 4), and determine
the amount of growth attributed to each source.
Solution
The production function or growth accounting method estimates the
growth in GDP using Equation 4:
Growth in potential GDP = α∆K/K + (1 − α)∆L/L + ∆A/A
The annual growth rate in capital is calculated from Exhibit 20 as
(2,898/2,036)1/9 − 1 = 4.0%.
The labor input is measured by the growth rate in total hours worked in the
economy (Exhibit 19) and given by
(31,527/35,358)1/9 − 1 = −1.27%.
The growth rate in total factor productivity (Exhibit 19) is calculated by
using a geometric average of the growth rates for 2006–2015 and is equal
to −0.85%. Finally, the labor share of output is given by the average of the
labor cost as a percentage of total factor cost, which is 58.7% for 2006–2015
(Exhibit 19). Thus, the share of capital (α) is 1 − 0.587 = 41.3%.
Using these numbers, the growth in potential GDP is
Growth in potential GDP = αΔK/K + (1 − α)ΔL/L + ΔA/A
= (0.413)0.04 + (0.587)(−0.0127) + (−0.0085)
= 0.06%
Sources of growth for Spain over the period 2006–2015 were as follows:
Capital (0.413) × (0.04) = 1.65%
Labor (0.587) × (−0.0127) = −0.75%
TFP = −0.85%
2. Calculate the potential growth rate of the Spanish economy using the labor
productivity method (Equation 5).
Solution
The labor productivity method estimates the growth in GDP using Equation
5:
Growth rate in potential GDP = Long-term growth rate of labor force + Long-term
growth rate in labor productivity
As before, we use the growth in total hours worked to measure the growth
in the labor force. The growth in labor productivity per hour worked is as
follows:
(54/48)1/9 − 1 = 1.32%


=== PAGE 156 ===


150 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Growth in potential GDP = -1.27% + 1.32% = 0.05%
Note that the estimate of potential GDP growth using the labor productivity
approach is broadly similar to that obtained from the growth accounting
method. In general, the two methods are likely to give somewhat different
estimates because they rely on different data inputs. The growth accounting
method requires measurements of the physical capital stock and TFP. As
discussed earlier, TFP is estimated using various time-series or econometric
models of the component of growth that is not accounted for by the explicit
factors of production. As a result, the estimate of TFP reflects the average
(or “smoothed”) behavior of the growth accounting residual. The labor pro-
ductivity approach is simpler, and it avoids the need to estimate the capital
input and TFP. In contrast to the estimated value of TFP, labor productivity
is measured as a pure residual; that is, it is the part of GDP growth that is
not explained by the labor input (and only the labor input). The cost of the
simplification is that the labor productivity approach does not allow a de-
tailed analysis of the drivers of productivity growth.
3. How significant are capital deepening and technology in explaining growth
for Spain?
Solution
Capital deepening occurs in an economy when there is an increase in the
capital-to-labor ratio. The labor input for Spain is measured in terms of total
hours worked in the economy. Thus, the capital-to-labor ratio for Spain
is calculated by dividing the physical capital stock in Exhibit 20 by total
hours worked in Exhibit 19. The results, shown in Exhibit 21, indicate that
capital deepening was very significant in Spain: The amount of capital per
hour worked increased from $57.6 in 2006 to $91.9 in 2015. In terms of the
growth rate, the capital-to-labor ratio increased at an annual rate of 5.3%.
The contribution of TFP is measured by the growth in total factor produc-
tivity. In contrast to capital deepening, TFP made a negative contribution to
growth; the average rate of growth for TFP from 2006 to 2015 was −0.85%.
However, TFP is estimated using various statistical techniques, and given
the uncertainty around these estimates, it should be viewed with some
caution.
Exhibit 21: Estimated Capital-to-Labor Ratio
($/hour worked)
2006 $57.6
2007 62.8
2008 68.2
2009 76.0
2010 80.8
2011 84.8
2012 90.1
2013 93.4
2014 93.3
2015 91.9


=== PAGE 157 ===


Growth in an Open Economy 151
4. What is the steady-state growth rate for Spain according to the neoclassical
model?
Solution
The steady-state growth rate in the neoclassical model is estimated by the
following (see Equation 8):
ΔY/Y = (θ)/(1 − α) + n
= Growth rate of TFP scaled by labor factor share + Growth rate in the labor
force
Steady-state growth rate = −0.85%/(1 − 0.413) + (−1.27%) = −2.7%
As expected, the growth rate in potential GDP (calculated as in the solutions
to 1 and 2) is above the steady-state growth rate. The reason for this is that
Spain’s economy is still in the process of converging to the higher income
levels of the United States and the major economies in Europe. The physical
capital stock is below the steady state, and capital deepening is a significant
factor increasing productivity growth and the growth in potential GDP.
Steady-state growth may be somewhat underestimated in our analysis given
that TFP growth is likely to revert to the 1% annual rate of increase exhibit-
ed in other major developed economies. This shift is likely to be offset by a
lower growth rate in the labor input (see Example 6). It should also be noted
that the negative growth in the labor force used in the calculation is based
on a period whose start coincides with high level of hours worked and ends
in a year when the hours worked were particularly low. The hours worked
actually rose subsequent to the 2006–2015 period.
5. Assess the implications of the growth analysis for future economic growth
and equity prices in Spain.
Solution
The results suggest that potential GDP growth in Spain is close to 0%. As we
saw in Exhibit 1, the growth rate of actual GDP since early 2000 has been
0.91% per year, close to the previous estimate of potential but well above
the steady state. The problem is that all the growth in potential GDP results
from the increase in the labor and capital inputs, with capital deepening
being very significant as the capital-to-labor ratio is increasing at a 5.3%
annual rate. The neoclassical model suggests that the impact of capital deep-
ening will decline over time and the economy will move toward a steady-
state rate of growth. Thus, growth based on capital deepening should not be
sustainable over time.
The other major question raised is whether the labor input can continue to
decline at an annual rate of 1.3%. We examined this question in Example 6.
In sum, potential GDP growth is likely to be negatively influenced over time
by Spain’s reliance on capital deepening. A positive impact may come from
increasing labor input. The reversion of TFP growth to levels more typical of
other European economies should also be a positive factor. Even if TFP does
rebound, relatively slow growth in potential GDP in Spain will likely restrain
future stock price increases.


=== PAGE 158 ===


152 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
SUMMARY
This reading focuses on the factors that determine the long-term growth trend in
the economy. As part of the development of global portfolio equity and fixed-income
strategies, investors must be able to determine both the near-term and the sustainable
rates of growth within a country. Doing so requires identifying and forecasting the
factors that determine the level of GDP and that determine long-term sustainable
trends in economic growth.
■ The sustainable rate of economic growth is measured by the rate of increase
in the economy’s productive capacity or potential GDP.
■ Growth in real GDP measures how rapidly the total economy is expanding.
Per capita GDP, defined as real GDP divided by population, measures the
standard of living in each country.
■ The growth rate of real GDP and the level of per capita real GDP vary widely
among countries. As a result, investment opportunities differ by country.
■ Equity markets respond to anticipated growth in earnings. Higher sustain-
able economic growth should lead to higher earnings growth and equity
market valuation ratios, all other things being equal.
■ In the long run, the growth rate of earnings cannot exceed the growth in
potential GDP. Labor productivity is critical because it affects the level of
the upper limit. A permanent increase in productivity growth will raise the
upper limit on earnings growth and should translate into faster long-run
earnings growth and a corresponding increase in stock price appreciation.
■ For global fixed-income investors, a critical macroeconomic variable is the
rate of inflation. One of the best indicators of short- to intermediate-term
inflation trends is the difference between the growth rate of actual and
potential GDP.
■ Capital deepening, an increase in the capital-to-labor ratio, occurs when the
growth rate of capital (net investment) exceeds the growth rate of labor. In a
graph of output per capita versus the capital-to-labor ratio, it is reflected by
a move along the curve (i.e., the production function).
■ An increase in total factor productivity causes a proportional upward shift
in the entire production function.
■ One method of measuring sustainable growth uses the production function
and the growth accounting framework developed by Solow. It arrives at the
growth rate of potential GDP by estimating the growth rates of the econo-
my’s capital and labor inputs plus an estimate of total factor productivity.
■ An alternative method measures potential growth as the long-term growth
rate of the labor force plus the long-term growth rate of labor productivity.
■ The forces driving economic growth include the quantity and quality of
labor and the supply of non-ICT and ICT capital, public capital, raw materi-
als, and technological knowledge.
■ The labor supply is determined by population growth, the labor force par-
ticipation rate, and net immigration. The physical capital stock in a country
increases with net investment. The correlation between long-run economic
growth and the rate of investment is high.
■ Technological advances are discoveries that make it possible to produce
more or higher-quality goods and services with the same resources or
inputs. Technology is a major factor determining TFP. TFP is the main
factor affecting long-term, sustainable economic growth rates in developed


=== PAGE 159 ===


Growth in an Open Economy 153
countries and also includes the cumulative effects of scientific advances,
applied research and development, improvements in management methods,
and ways of organizing production that raise the productive capacity of
factories and offices.
■ Total factor productivity, estimated using a growth accounting equation, is
the residual component of growth after accounting for the weighted contri-
butions of all explicit factors (e.g., labor and capital).
■ Labor productivity is defined as output per worker or per hour worked.
Growth in labor productivity depends on capital deepening and technologi-
cal progress.
■ The academic growth literature is divided into three theories —the classical
view, the neoclassical model, and the new endogenous growth view.
■ In the classical model, growth in per capita income is only temporary
because an exploding population with limited resources brings per capita
income growth to an end.
■ In the neoclassical model, a sustained increase in investment increases the
economy’s growth rate only in the short run. Capital is subject to dimin-
ishing marginal returns, so long-run growth depends solely on population
growth, progress in TFP, and labor’s share of income.
■ The neoclassical model assumes that the production function exhibits
diminishing marginal productivity with respect to any individual input.
■ The point at which capital per worker and output per worker are growing at
equal, sustainable rates is called the steady state or balanced growth path for
the economy. In the steady state, total output grows at the rate of labor force
growth plus the rate of growth of TFP divided by the elasticity of output
with respect to labor input.
■ The following parameters affect the steady-state values for the
capital-to-labor ratio and output per worker: saving rate, labor force growth,
growth in TFP, depreciation rate, and elasticity of output with respect to
capital.
■ The main criticism of the neoclassical model is that it provides no quantifi-
able prediction of the rate or form of TFP change. TFP progress is regarded
as exogenous to the model.
■ Endogenous growth theory explains technological progress within the
model rather than treating it as exogenous. As a result, self-sustaining
growth emerges as a natural consequence of the model and the economy
does not converge to a steady-state rate of growth that is independent of
saving/investment decisions.
■ Unlike the neoclassical model, where increasing capital will result in
diminishing marginal returns, the endogenous growth model allows for the
possibility of constant or even increasing returns to capital in the aggregate
economy.
■ In the endogenous growth model, expenditures made on R&D and for
human capital may have large positive externalities or spillover effects.
Private spending by companies on knowledge capital generates benefits to
the economy as a whole that exceed the private benefit to the company.
■ The convergence hypothesis predicts that the rates of growth of productivity
and GDP should be higher in the developing countries. Those higher growth
rates imply that the per capita GDP gap between developing and developed
economies should narrow over time. The evidence on convergence is mixed.


=== PAGE 160 ===


154 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
■ Countries fail to converge because of low rates of investment and savings,
lack of property rights, political instability, poor education and health,
restrictions on trade, and tax and regulatory policies that discourage work
and investing.
■ Opening an economy to financial and trade flows has a major impact on
economic growth. The evidence suggests that more open and trade-oriented
economies will grow at a faster rate.


=== PAGE 161 ===


References 155
REFERENCES
L’Her, J.-F., T. Masmoudi, and R. K. Krishnamoorthy. 2018. “Net Buybacks and the Seven
Dwarfs.” Financial Analysts Journal 74 (4): 57–85.
OECD. 2003. The Sources of Economic Growth in the OECD Countries. Paris: Organisation for
Economic Co-Operation and Development.
IMF. 2019. “Statistical Appendix.” In April 2019. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Ashauer, David. 1990. “Why Is Infrastructure Important?” In Is There a Shortfall in Public
Capital Investment? Edited by Alicia Munnell. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference
Series No. 34.
Denison, Edward. 1985. Trends in American Growth. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Grinold, Richard C. and Kenneth F. Kroner. 2002. “The Equity Risk Premium: Analyzing the
Long-Run Prospects for the Stock Market.” Investment Insights 5 (3): 7–33.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten. 2009. Penn World Table Version 6.3.
Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
Pennsylvania (August).
Jorgenson, Dale. 1966. Technology in Growth Theory. Technology and Growth, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston Conference Series.
Jorgenson, Dale. 2000. Raising the Speed Limit: US Economic Growth in the Information Age.
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity.
Levine, R. 2005. “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence.” In Handbook of Economic Growth,
ed. Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf. Amsterdam: Elsevier, B.V.
Mankiw, Gregory. 1995. “The Growth of Nations.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
10.2307/2534576
Romer, Paul. 1986. “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 94
(5): 1002–37. 10.1086/261420
Solow, Robert. 1957. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 39 (3): 312–20. 10.2307/1926047
Stewart, Scott, Christopher Piros, and Jeffrey Heisler. 2011. Running Money: Professional
Portfolio Management. McGraw-Hill/Irwin.


=== PAGE 162 ===


156 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions
1-9
Victor Klymchuk, the chief economist at ECONO Consulting (EC), is reviewing
the long-term GDP growth of three countries. Klymchuk is interested in fore-
casting the long-term change in stock market value for each country. Exhibit
1 presents current country characteristics and historical information on select
economic variables for the three countries.
Exhibit 1: Select Country Factors and Historical Economic Data
2009–2019
Growth
in Hours Growth in Growth
Worked Labor Pro- in TFP Growth in
Country Factors (%) ductivity (%) (%) GDP (%)
Country A ■ High level of savings 0.9 2.4 0.6 3.3
and investment
■ Highly educated
workforce
■ Low tariffs on for-
eign imports
■ Limited natural
resources
Country B ■ Developed financial −0.3 1.6 0.8 1.3
markets
■ Moderate levels of
disposable income
■ Significant foreign
direct and indirect
investments
■ Significant natural
resources
Country C ■ Politically unstable 1.8 0.8 −0.3 2.6
■ Limited property
rights
■ Poor public educa-
tion and health
■ Significant natural
resources
Klymchuk instructs an associate economist at EC to assist him in forecasting the
change in stock market value for each country. Klymchuk reminds the associate
of the following:
Statement 1: “Over short time horizons, percentage changes in GDP, the ratio


=== PAGE 163 ===


Practice Problems 157
of earnings to GDP, and the price-to-earnings ratio are important factors for
describing the relationship between economic growth and stock prices. However,
I am interested in a long-term stock market forecast.”
A client is considering investing in the sovereign debt of Country A and Country
B and asks Klymchuk his opinion of each country’s credit risk. Klymchuk tells the
client the following:
Statement 2: “Over the next 10 years, I forecast higher potential GDP growth for
Country A and lower potential GDP growth for Country B. The capital per work-
er is similar and very high for both countries, but per capita output is greater for
Country A.”
The client tells Klymchuk that Country A will offer 50-year bonds and that he be-
lieves the bonds could be a good long-term investment given the higher potential
GDP growth. Klymchuk responds to the client as follows:
Statement 3: “After the next 10 years, I think the sustainable rate of economic
growth for Country A will be affected by a growing share of its population over
the age of 65, a declining percentage under age 16, and minimal immigration.”
The client is surprised to learn that Country C, a wealthy, oil-rich country with
significant reserves, is experiencing sluggish economic growth and asks Klym-
chuk for an explanation. Klymchuk responds by stating:
Statement 4: “Although countries with greater access to natural resources are
often wealthier, the relationship between resource abundance and economic
growth is not clear. My analysis shows that the presence of a dominant natural
resource (oil) in Country C is constraining growth. Interestingly, Country A has
few natural resources but is experiencing a strong rate of increase in per capita
GDP growth.”
Klymchuk knows that growth in per capita income cannot be sustained by pure
capital deepening. He asks the associate economist to determine how important
capital deepening is as a source of economic growth for each country. Klymchuk
instructs the associate to use the data provided in Exhibit 1.
Klymchuk and his associate debate the concept of convergence. The associate
economist believes that developing countries, irrespective of their particular
characteristics, will eventually equal developed countries in per capita output.
Klymchuk responds as follows:
Statement 5: “Poor countries will only converge to the income levels of the rich-
est countries if they make appropriate institutional changes.”
1. Based on the country factors provided in Exhibit 1, the country most likely to be
considered a developing country is:
A. Country A.
B. Country B.
C. Country C.
2. Based on Exhibit 1, capital deepening as a source of growth was most important
for:
A. Country A.
B. Country B.
C. Country C.
3. Based on Statement 1, over the requested forecast horizon, the factor that will


=== PAGE 164 ===


158 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
most likely drive stock market performance is the percentage change in:
A. GDP.
B. the earnings to GDP ratio.
C. the price-to-earnings ratio.
4. Based solely on the predictions in Statement 2, over the next decade Country B’s
sovereign credit risk will most likely:
A. increase.
B. decrease.
C. not change.
5. Based on Statement 2, the difference in per capita output between Country A and
Country B most likely results from differences in:
A. capital deepening.
B. capital per worker.
C. total factor productivity.
6. Based on Statement 3, after the next 10 years, the growth rate of potential GDP
for Country A will most likely be:
A. lower.
B. higher.
C. unchanged.
7. Based on Statement 4 and Exhibit 1, the sluggish economic growth in Country C
is least likely to be explained by:
A. limited labor force growth.
B. export driven currency appreciation.
C. poorly developed economic institutions.
8. Based on Statement 4, the higher rate of per capita income growth in Country A
is least likely explained by the:
A. rate of investment.
B. growth of its population.
C. application of information technology.
9. The type of convergence described by Klymchuk in Statement 5 is best described
as:
A. club convergence.
B. absolute convergence.
C. conditional convergence.


=== PAGE 165 ===


Practice Problems 159
The following information relates to questions
10-15
At an international finance and economics conference in Bamako, Mali, Jose
Amaral of Brazil and Lucinda Mantri of India are discussing how to spur their
countries’ economic growth. Amaral believes that growth can be bolstered by
removing institutional impediments and suggests several possibilities for Brazil:
launching a rural literacy program, clarifying property rights laws, and imple-
menting a new dividend tax on foreign investors.
Mantri responds that for India, capital deepening will be more effective, and she
has proposed the following ideas: building a group of auto and textile factories in
the southern states, developing a north–south and east–west highway network,
and sponsoring a patent initiative.
In response, Amaral says to Mantri:
“Based on endogenous growth theory, one of those proposals is more likely to
raise total factor productivity than result in pure capital deepening.”
Although Mantri recognizes that India lacks the significant natural resources
that Brazil has, she states that India can overcome this challenge by bolstering
long-term growth through three channels:
Channel 1 Deepening the capital base
Channel 2 Making investments in technology
Channel 3 Maintaining a low rupee exchange rate
Each country’s basic economic statistics were presented at the conference. Select-
ed data for Brazil and India are presented in Exhibit 1. Adama Kanté, a fund man-
ager based in Mali, is planning to increase the fund’s allocation to international
equities and, after some preliminary analysis, has determined the new allocation
will be to Brazilian or Indian equities. After reviewing the data in Exhibit 1, Kanté
decides that the allocation will be to Indian equities.
Exhibit 1: Economic Statistics for Brazil and India
Economic Statistic Brazil India
GDP per capita, 2018 $14,360 $6,999
GDP per capita growth, 2000–2018 1.3% 5.8%
GDP growth, 2005–2018 2.0% 7.2%
- Growth resulting from labor productivity 1.3% 6.3%
component
- Growth resulting from capital deepening 1.9% 4.5%
component
Kanté is concerned about the low standard of living in Mali and its large informal
sector. To improve per capita GDP, Kanté is considering five specific strategies:
Strategy 1 Lower the country’s tax rate.
Strategy 2 Introduce policies that encourage the return of highly educated Malian
emigrants.
Strategy 3 Build daycare centers to increase women’s participation in the
workforce.


=== PAGE 166 ===


160 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
Strategy 4 Impose high tariffs on imports to protect the country’s nascent
industries.
Strategy 5 Use economic development bank loans to improve the country’s trans-
port and manufacturing infrastructure.
10. Which of Amaral’s initiatives is least likely to achieve his stated growth objective?
A. Dividend tax
B. Rural literacy
C. Property rights
11. Which proposal for India is Amaral most likely referring to in his response to
Mantri?
A. Patent initiative
B. Highway network
C. Auto and textile factories
12. The channel that is least likely to help India overcome its challenge of lacking
significant natural resources is:
A. Channel 1.
B. Channel 2.
C. Channel 3.
13. Based on Exhibit 1, which Indian economic statistic least likely supports Kanté’s
international equity allocation preference?
A. GDP per capita
B. Growth resulting from labor productivity
C. Growth resulting from capital deepening
14. The strategy that is least likely to improve per capita GDP in Mali is:
A. Strategy 1.
B. Strategy 2.
C. Strategy 3.
15. Which of the following strategies being considered by Kanté is most likely to
undermine or delay convergence with developed economies?
A. Strategy 2
B. Strategy 4
C. Strategy 5


=== PAGE 167 ===


Practice Problems 161
The following information relates to questions
16-21
Hans Schmidt, CFA, is a portfolio manager with a boutique investment firm that
specializes in sovereign credit analysis. Schmidt’s supervisor asks him to develop
estimates for GDP growth for three countries. Information on the three countries
is provided in Exhibit 1.
Exhibit 1: Select Economic Data for Countries A, B, and C
Country Economy Capital per Worker
A Developed High
B Developed High
C Developing Low
After gathering additional data on the three countries, Schmidt shares his find-
ings with colleague, Sean O’Leary. After reviewing the data, O’Leary notes the
following observations:
Observation 1: The stock market of Country A has appreciated considerably
over the past several years. Also, the ratio of corporate profits to GDP for Coun-
try A has been trending upward over the past several years and is now well above
its historical average.
Observation 2: The government of Country C is working hard to bridge the gap
between its standard of living and that of developed countries. Currently, the rate
of potential GDP growth in Country C is high.
Schmidt knows that a large part of the analysis of sovereign credit is to develop a
thorough understanding of the potential GDP growth rate for a particular coun-
try and the region in which the country is located. Schmidt is also doing research
on Country D for a client of the firm. Selected economic facts on Country D are
provided in Exhibit 2.
Exhibit 2: Select Economic Facts for Country D
■ Slow GDP Growth
■ Abundant Natural Resources
■ Developed Economic Institutions
Prior to wrapping up his research, Schmidt schedules a final meeting with
O’Leary to see if he can provide any other pertinent information. O’Leary makes
the following statements to Schmidt:
Statement 1: Many countries that have the same population growth rate, savings
rate, and production function will have growth rates that converge over time.
Statement 2: Convergence between countries can occur more quickly if econ-
omies are open and there is free trade and international borrowing and lending;
however, there is no permanent increase in the rate of growth in an economy
from a more open trade policy.
16. Based on Exhibit 1, the factor that would most likely have the greatest positive


=== PAGE 168 ===


162 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
impact on the per capita GDP growth of Country A is:
A. free trade.
B. technology.
C. saving and investment.
17. Based on Observation 1, in the long run the ratio of profits to GDP in Country A
is most likely to:
A. remain near its current level.
B. increase from its current level.
C. decrease from its current level.
18. Based on Observation 2, Country C is most likely to have:
A. relatively low real asset returns.
B. a relatively low real interest rate.
C. a relatively high real interest rate.
19. Based on Exhibit 2, the least likely reason for the current pace of GDP growth in
Country D is:
A. a persistently strong currency.
B. strong manufacturing exports.
C. strong natural resource exports.
20. The type of convergence described by O’Leary in Statement 1 is best described as:
A. club convergence.
B. absolute convergence.
C. conditional convergence.
21. Which of the following growth models is most consistent with O’Leary’s State-
ment 2?
A. Classical
B. Endogenous
C. Neoclassical


=== PAGE 169 ===


Solutions 163
SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. Country C is the most likely to be a developing economy. Political
instability, limited property rights, and poor public education and health are all
factors that limit economic growth and thereby contribute to a relatively low
standard of living.
2. A is correct. The associate economist can measure the effect of pure capital deep-
ening by measuring the difference of the growth rates of labor productivity and
total factor productivity. The larger the difference, the more important capital
deepening is as a source of economic growth. From 2000–2010, Country A’s labor
productivity grew by 2.4% per year, of which 0.6% came from TFP growth and
1.8% from capital deepening (2.4% − 0.6% = 1.8%).
3. A is correct. In the long run, the GDP growth rate is the most important driver
of stock market performance. Therefore, the associate economist should focus
on the drivers of long-run potential GDP growth. The ratio of earnings to GDP
cannot increase indefinitely because that would imply that profit would eventu-
ally absorb all of GDP. This ratio cannot shrink forever, either, because unprofit-
able companies will go out of business. Thus, the annualized growth rate of the
earnings to GDP ratio must be approximately zero over long time horizons, and
this ratio should not be a dominant factor in forecasting long-term stock mar-
ket performance. Similarly, the price-to-earnings ratio cannot grow or contract
at a finite rate forever because investors will not pay an excessive price for each
dollar of earnings, nor will they give away earnings for free. Therefore the rate of
change in the price-to-earnings ratio must be approximately zero over long time
horizons and should not be a dominant factor in the forecast of long-term stock
market performance.
4. A is correct. Credit rating agencies consider the growth rate of potential GDP
when evaluating the credit risk of sovereign debt. The chief economist’s expecta-
tion for lower potential GDP growth for Country B over the next decade increas-
es the perceived credit risk of its sovereign bonds.
5. C is correct. The higher per capita output for Country A is most likely the result
of differences in the cumulative impact of technological progress embodied in
total factor productivity. Technological progress raises a country’s productive
capacity and causes an upward shift in the entire production function, resulting
in higher output per worker for a given level of capital per worker.
6. A is correct. Demographic factors can positively or negatively contribute to a
country’s sustainable rate of economic growth. After the next 10 years, Country
A is expected to experience a growing share of the population over the age of
65 and a declining percentage of the population under the age of 16. All else the
same, this implies slower growth of the labor force and hence slower growth of
potential GDP. Immigration could offset these demographic challenges. How-
ever, Statement 3 indicates that Country A is expected to experience minimal
immigration.
7. A is correct. Country C is an example of a country endowed with an abundant
natural resource yet experiencing slow economic growth. Although labor force
growth is an important source of economic growth, it is the least likely expla-
nation of the sluggish economic growth in Country C. As shown in Exhibit 1,
growth in total hours worked has accounted for most of Country C’s growth. Fur-
thermore, export driven currency appreciation and poorly developed economic


=== PAGE 170 ===


164 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
institutions are both likely causes of sluggish growth in countries with abundant
natural resources.
8. B is correct. Population growth can increase the growth rate of the overall
economy but does not affect the rate of increase in per capita GDP. Therefore,
population growth does not explain Country A’s higher rate of per capita income
growth. An increase in labor force participation could, however, raise the growth
rate of per capita GDP.
9. A is correct. Klymchuk is referring to the concept of club convergence. The basic
premise is that lower-income members of the club are converging to the income
levels of the richest countries. This implies that the countries with the lowest per
capita income in the club grow at the fastest rate. Countries outside the club,
however, continue to fall behind.
10. A is correct. Amaral’s initiative to implement a new dividend tax is likely to
impede inflows of equity capital by making equity investment in Brazil less at-
tractive for foreign investors. Capital flows, or lack thereof, have a major impact
on economic growth because, in an open economy, world savings can finance
domestic investment. As a potential source of funds, foreign investment breaks
the vicious cycle of low income, low domestic savings, and low investment.
11. A is correct. Mantri’s proposal to sponsor a patent initiative, which is likely to re-
sult in technology investment and improvement, is likely to cause a proportional
upward shift in the entire production function, allowing the economy to produce
higher output per worker for a given level of capital per worker. Technological
progress also increases the marginal product of capital relative to its marginal
cost.
12. C is correct. Maintaining a low currency exchange rate is a policy aimed at main-
taining demand for the country’s exports. It would have little direct impact on
the potential growth rate of aggregate supply. It might boost long-term capacity
growth indirectly, however, by encouraging adoption of leading edge technology.
Nonetheless, it would not be expected to be as powerful as capital deepening
and/or investment in technology.
13. A is correct. Kanté’s decision to invest in equities in India is supported by the
country’s strong economic growth. For global investors, economic growth is
important because equity composite valuations depend to a great extent on both
the level of economic output (GDP per capita and GDP overall) and the rate of
economic growth. Relative to Brazil, India’s growth rate in per capita GDP has
been much higher, and furthermore, the growth rate in GDP has also been much
higher than that of Brazil. In contrast to the growth rate, the relatively low level of
GDP per capita in India is less likely to indicate attractive equity investment op-
portunities. Low per capita GDP suggests that India may lack sufficient industrial
and financial infrastructure to support some types of industries. It also indicates
that domestic purchasing power is relatively limited, decreasing the potential for
higher-margin, domestically oriented businesses.
14. A is correct. With Mali’s low standard of living (i.e., GDP per capita and large
informal workforce), the tax rate is unlikely to be an impediment to growth, so
lowering the tax rate is not likely to be a major contributor to growth.
15. B is correct. The strategy for Mali to impose high tariffs (trade restrictions) on
imports is likely to undermine rather than enhance growth and therefore is not
supportive of convergence with developed economies. Freer trade (fewer trade
restrictions) tends to enhance growth by, for example, inducing a shift of resourc-


=== PAGE 171 ===


Solutions 165
es into industries in which the country has a comparative thereby increasing
overall productivity; forcing less efficient domestic companies to exit and more
efficient ones to innovate; allowing domestic producers to more fully exploit
economies of scale by selling to a larger market; and enabling less advanced sec-
tors of an economy to catch up with more-advanced countries or sectors through
knowledge spillovers.
16. B is correct. Country A is a developed country with a high level of capital per
worker. Technological progress and/or more intensive use of existing technolo-
gy can help developed countries increase productivity and thereby increase per
capita GDP. Most developed countries have reasonably low trade barriers; thus,
somewhat freer trade is likely to have only an incremental, and probably transi-
tory, impact on per capita GDP growth. Also, because the country already has a
high capital-to-labor ratio, increased saving/investment is unlikely to increase the
growth rate substantially unless it embodies improved technology.
17. C is correct. The ratio of profits to GDP for Country A has been trending up-
ward over the past several years and is now well above its historical average. The
ratio of profits to GDP cannot rise forever. At some point, stagnant labor income
would make workers unwilling to work without an increase in wages and would
also undermine demand, making further expansion of profit margins unsustain-
able. Thus, the ratio of profits to GDP will likely decline in the long run toward its
historical average.
18. C is correct. A high growth rate of potential GDP would cause real incomes to
rise more rapidly and also translate into higher real interest rates and higher
expected/required real asset returns. The real interest rate is essentially the real
return that consumers/savers demand in exchange for postponing consumption.
Faster growth in potential GDP means that consumers expect their real income
to rise more rapidly. This implies that an extra unit of future income/consump-
tion is less valuable than it would be if income were expected to grow more slow-
ly. All else the same, the real interest rate will have to be relatively high in order to
induce the savings required to fund required/desired capital accumulation.
19. B is correct. Country D is a country with abundant resources and has developed
the economic institutions necessary for growth, yet the country is experiencing
slow economic growth. It is likely that Country D is experiencing the Dutch Dis-
ease, whereby currency appreciation driven by strong export demand for natural
resources makes other segments of the economy, in particular manufacturing,
globally uncompetitive. Strong manufacturing exports indicate that Country D is
globally competitive and likely to have adopted leading edge technology. Thus, it
is unlikely that the slow growth reflects inability to maintain productivity growth.
Similarly, strong exports suggest adequate demand for its products. Thus, strong
exports are unlikely to be the cause of slow growth.
20. C is correct. Conditional convergence means that convergence is conditional on
the countries having the same savings rate, population growth rate, and produc-
tion function. If these conditions hold, the neoclassical model implies conver-
gence to the same level of per capita output as well as the same steady-state
growth rate.
21. C is correct. According to the neoclassical model, convergence should occur
more quickly if economies are open and there is free trade and international bor-
rowing and lending. Opening up the economy should increase the rate at which
the capital-to-labor ratio converges among countries. In the neoclassical Solow
model, however, after the reallocation of world savings, there is no permanent
increase in the rate of growth in an economy. Both the developed and developing


=== PAGE 172 ===


166 Learning Module 2 Economic Growth
countries eventually grow at the same steady-state rate.